\input texinfo  @c -*- coding: utf-8 -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename jdee.info
@settitle JDEE Manual
@c %**end of header

@documentencoding UTF-8

@titlepage
@title JDEE Manual
@page JDEE Manual
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, User's Guide, (dir), (dir)
@top The Java Development Environment for Emacs (JDEE)

@end ifnottex

@menu
* User's Guide::
* Developer's Guide::
* Index::

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

User's Guide

* Introduction::
* Registering and Selecting a JDK::
* Editing Java Source Files::
* Documenting Code::
* Abbreviations::
* Completing Expressions::
* Dynamic Keyword Completion::
* Generating Code::
* Checking Coding Style::
* Compiling Java Programs::
* Building Java Applications::
* Running Java Applications::
* Working with Applets::
* Debugging Applications::
* Specifying Classpaths::
* Using Project Files::
* Displaying Java Documentation::
* Browsing Source Code::
* Searching Source Code::
* Customizing the JDEE::
* Installing a Plugin::

Introduction

* About::
* JDEE Requirements::
* Latest Version::
* Installing the JDEE::
* Reporting bugs::

Registering and Selecting a JDK

* Registering a JDK::
* Selecting a JDK::

Documenting Code

* Inserting Javadoc Comments::
* Generating the Documentation::

Abbreviations

* Keyword Abbreviations::
* Control Flow Abbreviations::

Control Flow Abbreviations

* Left Brace Placement::
* Customizing the Control Flow Templates::
* Adding Your Own Control Flow Templates::
* Enabling Variable Content::
* Disabling the Control Flow Abbreviations::

Completing Expressions

* Completing Method and Field Names::
* Selecting a Completion Method::
* Using Menu-Based Completion::
* Using In-Line Completion::
* Speeding Up Completion::

Dynamic Keyword Completion

* Dynamic Completion Commands::
* Electric Return::

Generating Code

* Generating Import Statements::
* Code Wizards::
* Code Templates::

Generating Import Statements

* Importing Classes::           Generate an import statement for the class at point
* Importing All Classes::       Generate import statements for all classes in the current buffer that need import statements
* Expanding Package Imports::   Expand a package import statement into specific class imports
* Collapsing Class Imports::    Collapse class imports into a package import statement
* Grouping Imports::            Group import statements
* Deleting Unneeded Imports::   Delete superfluous import statements

Code Wizards

* Method Override Wizard::
* Interface Wizard::
* Delegate Wizard::
* Get/Set Wizard::

Code Templates

* Buffer Templates::
* Specifying Boilerplate Text::
* Code Templates Customization Variables::
* Point Templates::
* Customizing Templates::
* Creating Templates::
* Defining a Template and Template Insertion Function::
* Registering Custom Templates::
* Assigning Keys to Templates::

Compiling Java Programs

* Compilation Buffer::
* Specifying a Compiler::
* Compilation Options::

Compilation Options

* Setting Compile Options Interactively::
* Compiler Customization Variables::

Building Java Applications

* Selecting a Build Method::
* Building with Make::
* Building with Ant::

Building with Make

* Make Options::
* Sample Makefile::

Running Java Applications

* Specifying the Application's Main Class::
* Specifying a Startup Directory::
* Setting VM Command-Line Arguments::
* Setting Command-Line Application Arguments::
* Navigating Exception Traces::
* Run Customization Variables::

Working with Applets

* Running Applets::
* Debugging Applets::
* Applet Customization Variables::

Specifying Classpaths

* Setting a Classpath Variable::
* Including Class Libraries::

Using Project Files

* How the JDEE Finds Project Files::
* Project File Contents::
* Creating a Project File::
* Creating Portable Projects::
* Disabling Context Switching::
* Project Hook Functions::

Displaying Java Documentation

* Browsing JDK Documentation::
* Context-Sensitive Class Help::
* Specifying a Browser::

Specifying a Browser

* Using emacs-w3m to Browse Java Doc::

Browsing Source Code

* Classes Index Menu::
* Using the Speedbar::
* Tags::

Classes Index Menu

* Special Index Entries::
* Alphabetizing the Classes Menu::
* Suppressing Method Signatures and Field Types::
* Disabling the Classes Menu::
* Using the Keyboard to Navigate the Classes Menu::

Using the Speedbar

* Package::
* Types::
* Dependencies::
* Updating the Speedbar::

Tags

* Tagging Java Source Code::
* Finding the Definition of a Symbol::

Searching Source Code

* Finding Expressions::
* Finding Symbol Definitions::
* Finding Classes::
* Cross-Referencing Classes::

Finding Expressions

* Using the Minibuffer-Based Find (jdee-find) Command::
* Customizing the Minibuffer-Based Find Command::
* Using the Dialog-Based Find (jdee-find-dlg) Command::

Cross-Referencing Classes

* Configuring the Cross-Referencer::
* Building the Cross-Reference Database::
* Using the Cross-Reference Database::
* Updating the Cross-Reference Database::

Customizing the JDEE

* JDEE Customization Variables::
* Customizing jdee-mode::

JDEE Customization Variables

* Setting a Customization Variable::
* Specifying Paths::
* JDEE Customization Groups::

Customizing jdee-mode

* Customizing Key Bindings::

Developer's Guide

* JDEE Components::             Describes parts of JDEE
* Creating Plugins::

Creating Plugins

* Plugin Requirements::
* Registering a Plugin::
* Running Java Code from a Plugin::
* Bootstrap File Example::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node User's Guide, Developer's Guide, Top, Top
@chapter User's Guide
Welcome to the JDEE User's Guide. This guide explains how to use the
JDEE to develop Java applications. The guide assumes that you are
familiar with Emacs, the Java programming language, and Java
development tools provided by Oracle.

@menu
* Introduction::
* Registering and Selecting a JDK::
* Editing Java Source Files::
* Documenting Code::
* Abbreviations::
* Completing Expressions::
* Dynamic Keyword Completion::
* Generating Code::
* Checking Coding Style::
* Compiling Java Programs::
* Building Java Applications::
* Running Java Applications::
* Working with Applets::
* Debugging Applications::
* Specifying Classpaths::
* Using Project Files::
* Displaying Java Documentation::
* Browsing Source Code::
* Searching Source Code::
* Customizing the JDEE::
* Installing a Plugin::
@end menu

@node Introduction, Registering and Selecting a JDK, User's Guide, User's Guide
@section Introduction

@menu
* About::
* JDEE Requirements::
* Latest Version::
* Installing the JDEE::
* Reporting bugs::
@end menu

@node About, JDEE Requirements, Introduction, Introduction
@subsection About
The Java Development Environment for Emacs (@abbr{JDEE}) is an Emacs Lisp
package that interfaces Emacs to third-party Java application
development tools, such as those provided by Oracle as part of its
JDK. The result is an integrated development environment (@abbr{IDE})
comparable in power to many commercial Java IDEs. Features include:

@itemize
@item source code editing with syntax highlighting and auto indentation

@item automatic completion of class fields and methods

@item compilation with automatic jump from error messages to responsible line in the source code.

@item generates class and method skeletons automatically

@item run Java application in an interactive (comint) Emacs buffer

@item integrated debugging with interactive debug command buffer and automatic display of current source file/line when stepping through code

@item browse JDK doc, using the browser of your choice

@item browse your source code, using the Emacs etags facility or a tree-structured speedbar.

@item supports latest version of JDK

@item runs on any platform supported by Emacs and JDK (e.g., Linux, Windows and Solaris)

@item easily and infinitely customizable

@item works with FSF Emacs and XEmacs
@end itemize

@node JDEE Requirements, Latest Version, About, Introduction
@subsection JDEE Requirements
The JDEE requires the following software:
@itemize

@item
FSF Emacs or XEmacs on Unix platforms; the 23.4 or later version
of Emacs on Windows platforms, for general source file editing
and tool integration functions

@item
Java Development Kit (@abbr{JDK}) or compatible set of Java development tools
(compiler, virtual machine, debugger, class libraries, etc.)

@item
Web browser for viewing documentation

@item
Bash or another Unix-style shell highly recommended for Windows
environments. The cygwin Unix emulation package for Windows from Red
Hat includes Bash
@end itemize

@node Latest Version, Installing the JDEE, JDEE Requirements, Introduction
@subsection Latest Version
See @uref{Downloading the JDEE} on the JDEE website for instructions
on downloading the most recent version of the JDEE.

@node Installing the JDEE, Reporting bugs, Latest Version, Introduction
@subsection Installing the JDEE
See the JDEE Installation Guide on the JDEE website for information on
installing the JDEE on your system.

@node Reporting bugs,  , Installing the JDEE, Introduction
@subsection Reporting bugs, enhancement suggestions
Please send bug reports and enhancement suggestions to
@email{jdee-users@@lists.sourceforge.net}.

@node Registering and Selecting a JDK, Editing Java Source Files, Introduction, User's Guide
@section Registering and Selecting a JDK

The JDEE relies on command-line Java development tools, such as those
supplied by Oracle as part of its Java Development Kit (JDK). Before
you can use the JDEE to compile, debug, or run an application, you
must tell it where the Java compiler, debugger, and virtual machine
are located on your system. The JDEE assumes that the compiler,
debugger, and vm are named javac, jdb, and java, respectively, and
that they are located on your system's command path. If these tools
are not located on the system command path or have different names,
you must tell the JDEE where they are located. The JDEE provides
customization variables for specifying the locations of individual
tools.

However, if you are using one or more versions of Oracle's JDK or a
clone of the JDK, the easiest way to specify the location of the
external development tools is to register the version of the JDK that
you intend to use. It is especially advantageous to register a JDK, if
you intend to use multiple versions of the JDK. The reason?
Registering each version of the JDK allows you to change JDKs by
changing a single customization variable. The following sections
explain how to register and select JDKs.

@menu
* Registering a JDK::
* Selecting a JDK::
@end menu

@node Registering a JDK, Selecting a JDK, Registering and Selecting a JDK, Registering and Selecting a JDK
@subsection Registering a JDK

To register a version of the JDK with the JDEE:

@enumerate
@item
Type M-x customize-variable RET jdee-jdk-registry RET.

The jdee-jdk-registry customization buffer appears.

@item
Click the INS button.

Enter the version number of the JDK and the path of the directory in
which the JDK is installed.

@item
Repeat the preceding steps until you have entered the versions and
paths of all versions of the JDK that you wish to use with the JDEE.

@item
Click the @samp{Save for Future Sessions} from the State menu.
This saves the setting of jdee-jdk-registry in your init file.

@end enumerate

@node Selecting a JDK,  , Registering a JDK, Registering and Selecting a JDK
@subsection Selecting a JDK
To select a JDK:

@enumerate

@item
Type M-x customize-variable RET jdee-jdk RET.

The jdee-jdk customization buffer appears.

@item
The buffer lists the JDKs that you have previously registered
(@ref{Registering a JDK}).

@item
Click the radio button next to the version of the JDK you want to use.

@item
Click the @samp{Save for Future Sessions} from the State menu.
This saves the setting of jdee-jdk-registry in your init file.

Note: This procedure saves your JDK selection in your init file so
that it applies to all projects. You can configure the JDEE to use different
JDKs for different projects by saving your customization in a project
file. (see Using Project Files) for more information.

@end enumerate

@node Editing Java Source Files, Documenting Code, Registering and Selecting a JDK, User's Guide
@section Editing Java Source Files

To edit an existing Java source file, load it into an Emacs buffer by
executing @kbd{C-x C-f}. Loading a Java source file into a buffer
causes the buffer to enter into jdee-mode, a variant of java-mode,
which is in turn a variant of the standard Emacs cc-mode for editing
source files written in C and related languages. jdee-mode offers all
the specialized source file editing commands of cc-mode plus functions
for creating, compiling, building, running, and debugging Java source
files. You can invoke the commands by selecting them from the JDEE menu
that jdee-mode displays on the Emacs menu bar or by typing the commands
in the Emacs minibuffer.

@node Documenting Code, Abbreviations, Editing Java Source Files, User's Guide
@section Documenting Code
The JDEE provides complete support for generating HTML documentation
for Java classes from comments inserted into the source code for those
classes.

See also Displaying Java Documentation.

@menu
* Inserting Javadoc Comments::
* Generating the Documentation::
@end menu

@node Inserting Javadoc Comments, Generating the Documentation, Documenting Code, Documenting Code
@subsection Inserting Javadoc Comments

To insert a skeleton javadoc comment for a class or method, position
point in the first line of the method or class and select
JDEE->Document from the Emacs menubar or type @kbd{C-c C-v j}.

To customize the javadoc skeletons, select
JDEE->Options->Project->Javadoc from the Emacs menubar.

Thanks to David Ponce for developing the JDEE's javadoc comment
generation facility.

@node Generating the Documentation,  , Inserting Javadoc Comments, Documenting Code
@subsection Generating the Documentation

To generate documentation for the current project, open any source
file in the project and select Make Doc from the JDEE menu or enter M-x
jdee-javadoc-make.

The jdee-javadoc-make command runs the JDK's javadoc program to
generate the documentation. The javadoc command must be on your
system's command path.

The jdee-javadoc-make command uses jdee-global-classpath as the
-classpath and jdee-sourcepath as the -sourcepath option for generating
the doc. You can specify all other javadoc options via JDEE
customization variables. To specify the options, select
Project->Options->Javadoc from the JDEE menu. Use
jdee-javadoc-gen-packages to specify the packages, classes, or source
files for which you want to generate javadoc. If this variable is nil,
the jdee-javadoc-make generates javadoc for the Java source file in the
current buffer.

Thanks to Sergey A Klibanov for developing the JDEE's javadoc
generation facility.

@node Abbreviations, Completing Expressions, Documenting Code, User's Guide
@section Abbreviations

The JDEE allows you to use abbreviations for Java keywords and control
flow constructs. The following sections explain how to use these
abbreviations.

@menu
* Keyword Abbreviations::
* Control Flow Abbreviations::
@end menu

@node Keyword Abbreviations, Control Flow Abbreviations, Abbreviations, Abbreviations
@subsection Keyword Abbreviations

The JDEE defines a set of abbreviations for Java keywords. When you
type one of these abbreviations followed by a space in a Java source
buffer, the JDEE optionally expands the abbreviation into the
keyword. For example, when the abbreviation mode is enabled, you need
only type fa followed by a space to enter the Java keyword false.

To enable or disable abbreviation mode by default for a project,
select JDEE->Project->Options ->General and toggle the boolean variable
jdee-enable-abbrev-mode.

To toggle abbreviation mode on or off during a session, select
JDEE->Code Generation->Modes->Abbrev.

To change, remove, or add an abbreviation, edit the variable
jdee-mode-abbreviations in the project customization buffer.

@indentedblock
Note: The JDEE's Java keyword expansion facility is based on the Emacs
abbrev-mode facility. For more information, see the Emacs user
manual.
@end indentedblock

@node Control Flow Abbreviations,  , Keyword Abbreviations, Abbreviations
@subsection Control Flow Abbreviations

The JDEE defines abbreviations for Java control flow structures, such
as @code{if-then-else}. When you enter the abbreviation followed by a
space, the JDEE expands the abbreviation into a corresponding control
structure template.

Example: expanding the @code{if-then-else} abbreviation:

@example
ife
@end example

expands to the control flow structure:

@example
if ( ) @{ @} // end of if () else @} // end of if () else
@end example

The JDEE defines the following abbreviations for control structures:
@indentedblock
@multitable @columnfractions .70 .14
@headitem Statement @tab Abbreviation
@item if-then @tab if
@item else @tab else
@item if-then-else @tab ife
@item else-if @tab eif
@item while @tab while
@item for @tab for
@item for (int I=0;I<UL;I++) @tab fori
@item for (Iterator i = c.iterator(); i.hasNext();) @tab foriter
@item main method @tab main
@item switch @tab switch
@item case @tab case
@item try @tab try
@item catch @tab catch
@item try finally @tab tryf
@item finally @tab finally
@end multitable
@end indentedblock

@indentedblock
Note: You must enable the JDEE's Java keyword abbreviation mode to use
the control flow abbreviations. See Java Keyword Completion for more
information.
@end indentedblock

Thanks to Eric D. Friedman for contributing the control flow templates.

@menu
* Left Brace Placement::
* Customizing the Control Flow Templates::
* Adding Your Own Control Flow Templates::
* Enabling Variable Content::
* Disabling the Control Flow Abbreviations::
@end menu

@node Left Brace Placement, Customizing the Control Flow Templates, Control Flow Abbreviations, Control Flow Abbreviations
@subsubsection Left Brace Placement
The JDEE's Java control flow templates support two options for opening
brace placement: placement on the first line of the template
(Kerningham & Ritchie Style, the default) and placement on a separate
line.

Type M-x customize-variable jdee-gen-k&r to specify the style you prefer.

@node Customizing the Control Flow Templates, Adding Your Own Control Flow Templates, Left Brace Placement, Control Flow Abbreviations
@subsubsection Customizing the Control Flow Templates
You can customize the templates to suit any indentation style. To
customize the templates, select Project->Options->Autocode from the
JDEE menu.

@node Adding Your Own Control Flow Templates, Enabling Variable Content, Customizing the Control Flow Templates, Control Flow Abbreviations
@subsubsection Adding Your Own Control Flow Templates
Use the jdee-gen-define-abbrev-template function to define your own
control flow abbreviation in your .emacs file. For example, the
following code defines an abbreviation for an else clause.

@example
(jdee-gen-define-abbrev-template "melse" '('> "else @{" '> 'n
'> 'r 'n "@}"))
@end example

The jdee-gen-define-abbrev-template function takes two arguments. The
first argument is a string that specifies the abbreviation. The
section argument is a list defining the text that replaces the
abbreviation. The list can contain any of the following elements.

Template Elements and their usage:

@table @asis
@item A string.
The string is inserted into the buffer at point.

@item The symbol 'p.
This position is saved in tempo-marks.

@item The symbol 'r.
If tempo-insert is called with ON-REGION non-nil the current region is
placed here. Otherwise it works like 'p.

@item (p PROMPT <NAME> <NOINSERT>)
If tempo-interactive is non-nil, the user is prompted in the minbuffer
with PROMPT for a string to be inserted. If the optional parameter
NAME is non-nil, the text is saved for later insertion with the s
tag. If there already is something saved under NAME that value is used
instead and no prompting is made. If NOINSERT is provided and non-nil,
nothing is inserted, but text is still saved when a NAME is
provided. For clarity, the symbol 'noinsert should be used as
argument.

@item (P PROMPT <NAME> <NOINSERT>)
Works just like the previous element, but forces tempo-interactive to
be true.

@item (r PROMPT <NAME> <NOINSERT>)
Like the previous, but if tempo-interactive is nil and tempo-insert is
called with ON-REGION non-nil, the current region is placed here. This
usually happens when you call the template function with a prefix
argument.

@item (s NAME)
Inserts text previously read with the (p ..) construct. Finds the
insertion saved under NAME and inserts it. Acts like 'p if
tempo-interactive is nil.

@item '&
If there is only whitespace between the line start and point, nothing
happens. Otherwise a newline is inserted.

@item '%
If there is only whitespace between point and end-of-line nothing
happens. Otherwise a newline is inserted.

@item 'n
Inserts a newline.

@item '>
The line is indented using indent-according-to-mode. Note that you
often should place this item after the text you want on the line.

@item 'n>
Inserts a newline and indents line.

@item 'r>
Like r, but it also indents the region.

@item 'o
Like '% but leaves the point before the new line.

@item Anything else.
It is evaluated and the result is treated as an element to be
inserted. One additional tag is useful for these cases. If an
expression returns a list '(l foo bar), the elements after 'l will be
inserted according to the usual rules. This makes it possible to
return several elements from one expression.
@end table

@node Enabling Variable Content, Disabling the Control Flow Abbreviations, Adding Your Own Control Flow Templates, Control Flow Abbreviations
@subsubsection Enabling Variable Content
Some templates optionally prompt you for items to insert into the
template. To enable prompting, set the variable tempo-interactive to a
non-nil value in your .emacs file.

@node Disabling the Control Flow Abbreviations,  , Enabling Variable Content, Control Flow Abbreviations
@subsubsection Disabling the Control Flow Abbreviations
To disable the control flow abbreviations, set the variable
jdee-gen-cflow-enable off.

@node Completing Expressions, Dynamic Keyword Completion, Abbreviations, User's Guide
@section Completing Expressions

Both Emacs and the JDEE provide commands for completing incomplete
expressions. Emacs provides commands that work for any expression but
only if the completions exist in an open buffer. The JDEE provides
completion commands that work for any Java method or field name that
exists on jdee-global-classpath. The following sections explain how to
use completion facilities supplied by the JDEE and by Emacs itself.

@menu
* Completing Method and Field Names::
* Selecting a Completion Method::
* Using Menu-Based Completion::
* Using In-Line Completion::
* Speeding Up Completion::
@end menu

@node Completing Method and Field Names, Selecting a Completion Method, Completing Expressions, Completing Expressions
@subsection Completing Method and Field Names

The JDEE provides comamnds that can complete an incomplete field or
method name. All the methods determine the set of possible completions
for an incomplete field or method name at point. They differ in how
they present the completions to you for selection. The commands
include:

@table @code
@item jdee-complete-in-line
This command uses the first completion that it finds to complete the
method or field name at point. If multiple completions exist, it
allows you to cycle through the completions, each completion replacing
the previous in the source buffer. See Using In-Line Completion for
more information.

@item jdee-complete-menu
This command displays a menu of possible completions for the
incomplete method or field name at point. It enters the completion
that you select in the source buffer. See Using Menu-Based Completion
for more information.

@item jdee-complete-minibuf
This command uses the minibuffer to display possible completions for
the incomplete method or field name at point. The comamnd enters the
completion that you select in the source buffer. See Using
Minibuffer-Based Completion for more information.

@item jdee-complete
This is the JDEE's user-definable "standard" completion command. It
delegates completion to one of the JDEE's other completion commands
(jdee-complete-menu by default) or to a custom completion function that
you specify (@ref{Selecting a Completion Method} for more
information.) The @code{jdee-complete command} is bound by default to
the key combination @kbd{C-c C-v C-.}. If you prefer another binding,
use the customization variable @code{jdee-key-bindings} to change the
binding.
@end table

The JDEE's field and method completion commands use the Beanshell to
run Java code that in turn uses Java's reflection (class
introspection) capability to determine the fields and methods defined
for the class of object at point. The commands start the Beanshell if
it is not running. This can cause a noticeable delay in completion the
first time it is used in a session. The response can also be slow for
classes containing many methods and fields.

@indentedblock
Note: @ref{Speeding Up Completion} for some tips on how you can
dramatically speed up field and method completion.
@end indentedblock

Completion works only for compiled classes that reside in the
classpath defined by @code{jdee-global-classpath}, if set, otherwise by
the @env{CLASSPATH} environment variable when the Beanshell
starts. Thus, if the JDEE is unable to complete a method or field,
make sure that the class that defines the field or method is compiled
and exists on the classpath defined by @code{jdee-global-classpath}, if
set, otherwise by the @env{CLASSPATH} environment variable.

The JDEE completion commands work for all of the following cases:
@itemize
@item
objects referenced by variables declared in the current buffer

@item
static fields and methods

@item
fields and methods of objects defined by the current class and its
parent

Names of fields and methods of the current class must start with this
or . (period). Names of fields and methods declared by the parent of
the current class must start with super.

For example, this command completes:
@example
. ^ this. ^ super. ^
@end example

@item
objects referenced by the fields of objects referenced by variables
declared in the current class or its parent or by static fields

For example, this command completes:
@example
System.out.prin ^
@end example

@item
objects returned by methods of objects referenced by variables defined
in the current

For example, this command completes:
@example
Toolkit.getDefaultToolkit().get ^
@end example

@item
objects referenced by method parameters

For example, this command completes:
@example
void setColor(String color) @{ color.get ^ @}
@end example

@end itemize

@node Selecting a Completion Method, Using Menu-Based Completion, Completing Method and Field Names, Completing Expressions
@subsection Selecting a Completion Method

The JDEE's generic completion command, @code{jdee-complete} delegates
completion to one of several specific completion commands supplied by
the JDEE or to a custom completion method that you supply. This allows
you to customize jdee-complete to use the completion method that you
prefer.

To specify your preferred completion method:

@enumerate
@item
Type M-x jdee-complete-function RET

@item
Select the completion command that implements the completion method
you prefer.

@item
If you selected Custom as your preferred completion function, enter
the name of the custom completion function in the adjacent edit field,
replacing the existing contents (ignore by default.).

@item
Save your selection in your .emacs or project file.
@end enumerate

@node Using Menu-Based Completion, Using In-Line Completion, Selecting a Completion Method, Completing Expressions
@subsection Using Menu-Based Completion

The jdee-complete-menu displays a popup menu of completions for the
method or field name at point. Selecting a completion from the menu
causes the command to use it to complete the method or field at
point. This section assumes that you have selected jdee-complete-menu
as your standard completion command.

To select completions from a menu:

@enumerate
@item
Position point immediately following the partially complete field or
method name.

@item
Type the @kbd{C-c C-v C-.} key combination.

@item
Select the desired completion from the menu.

@item
The JDEE inserts the completion at point in the buffer.
@end enumerate

@node Using In-Line Completion, Speeding Up Completion, Using Menu-Based Completion, Completing Expressions
@subsection Using In-Line Completion

The jdee-complete-in-line command allows you to select completions at
the point of insertion in the source buffer. The command finds all the
fields and methods that complete the name at point. It then inserts
the first potential completion in the buffer at point. Repeatedly
executing the command causes the JDEE to cycle through the other
potential completions. If the completion is a method name, the command
completes the method name and displays the method signature in the
minibuffer.

The @code{jdee-complete-in-line} command is bound to @kbd{C-c C-v
.}. You can use this combination to invoke the command or @kbd{C-c C-v
C-.}, if you have selected this command as your preferred completion
method. The following examples use the @kbd{C-c C-v .} combination.

Example: completing a String Method Name

Typing @kbd{C-c-C-v-.}

@example
String s; s.get ^
@end example

completes the method name at point as follows

@example
String s; s.getClass( ^
@end example

and displays

@example
java.lang.Class getClass()
@end example

in the minibuffer. Repeatedly typing @kbd{C-c-C-v-.} cycles through
all the other get methods for the Java String class.

@node Speeding Up Completion,  , Using In-Line Completion, Completing Expressions
@subsection Speeding Up Completion

Here are two ways you can significantly speed up field and method
completion:
@itemize

@item
Byte-compile the EIEIO and JDEE packages.

@item
The beanshell package, the Emacs interface to the BeanShell, is based
on the EIEIO object-oriented Lisp package for Emacs. Completion uses
the BeanShell heavily to determine the class of the field or method at
point. Thus compiling EIEIO and @file{beanshell.el} improves
completion's performance, dramatically in my tests.

@item
Import by class, not by package, in your Java files.

Every package import, e.g., @code{java.util.*}, requires invoking the
BeanShell to determine the fully qualified name of the class at point
(see jdee-parse-get-qualified-name). A Beanshell invocation is by far
the most time-consuming operation required for completion. Thus
eliminating the use of package-level imports can significantly speed
up completion.
@end itemize

@node Dynamic Keyword Completion, Generating Code, Completing Expressions, User's Guide
@section Dynamic Keyword Completion

Emacs provides dynamic completion commands that attempt to find
completions for the word at point in the current buffer or other
buffers.

Example: Using Dynamic Completion

Suppose that the current source buffer contains the class names
Component and Container. Now suppose you enter Co somewhere in the
buffer and type @kbd{M-/}. The text Component replaces Co in the
buffer.

Typing @kbd{M-/} again changes Component to Container. In this way,
you can cycle through all the possible completions for Co in the
current buffer.

@menu
* Dynamic Completion Commands::
* Electric Return::
@end menu

@node Dynamic Completion Commands, Electric Return, Dynamic Keyword Completion, Dynamic Keyword Completion
@subsection Dynamic Completion Commands

Emacs provides two dynamic completion commands.

The @code{dabbrev-expand} command is bound to the key combination
@kbd{M-/} by default. It searches the current buffer for completions
of the word at point and, if none are found, other buffers of the same
type. For example, if the current buffer is a Java source buffer, it
searches other Java source buffers for completions if none are found
in the active buffer.

The @code{hippie-expand} command provides more extensive search
capabilities. See the docstrings for these functions for more
information.

@node Electric Return,  , Dynamic Completion Commands, Dynamic Keyword Completion
@subsection Electric Return

In electric return mode, pressing the @kbd{Enter} key causes the JDEE
to close open braces at the end of a line. To enable or disable this
mode by default, customize jdee-electric-return-p.

To turn the mode on or off during a session, select JDEE->Code
Generation->Modes->Electric Return.

@node Generating Code, Checking Coding Style, Dynamic Keyword Completion, User's Guide
@section Generating Code

The JDEE provides the following code generation capabilities.
    Code wizards
    Code templates

@menu
* Generating Import Statements::
* Code Wizards::
* Code Templates::
@end menu

@node Generating Import Statements, Code Wizards, Generating Code, Generating Code
@subsection Generating Import Statements

The JDEE provides a set of commands that generate and organize import
statements in the current buffer. The commands automate the following
tasks:

@menu
* Importing Classes::           Generate an import statement for the class at point
* Importing All Classes::       Generate import statements for all classes in the current buffer that need import statements
* Expanding Package Imports::   Expand a package import statement into specific class imports
* Collapsing Class Imports::    Collapse class imports into a package import statement
* Grouping Imports::            Group import statements
* Deleting Unneeded Imports::   Delete superfluous import statements
@end menu

@node Importing Classes, Importing All Classes, Generating Import Statements, Generating Import Statements
@subsubsection Importing Classes

The JDEE->Import->Class  (jdee-import-find-and-import, C-c C-v C-z)
command generates an import statement for the class at point in the
current buffer. It inserts the import statement at the head of the
buffer.

This command uses the BeanShell to search the classpath of the current
project for classes that match the name of the class at point. The
class name may be unqualified.

@indentedblock
Note: The classpath that the import wizard searches for import
candidates is the classpath specified by the value of
jdee-global-classpath for the current project.
@end indentedblock

If the command finds more than one class of the same unqualified name
on the current classpath, it prompts you to select one of the classes
to import.

The customization variable jdee-import-excluded-classes allows you to
specify rules for excluding classes from consideration for import into
the current source file. If the import command finds any classes on
the classpath that belong to the list of prohibited classes, it
removes them from the list of classes considered for import into the
current buffer.

You can use either regular expressions or Lisp functions to specify
class exclusion rules. For each rule, you can also specify that all
classes whose unqualified names match the rule be excluded from
consideration for import. This is useful for preventing the JDEE from
importing alternate implementations of standard Java classes that do
not need to be imported.

For example, the default setting for jdee-import-excluded-classes
includes a rule to exclude all classes belonging to the java.lang
package because every Java class implicitly imports this package. The
default setting for jdee-import-excluded-classes also excludes all
unqualified synonyms of classes belonging to the java.lang
package. This prevents importation of alternate implementations of
these classes, e.g., alternate implementations of java.lang.String,
included in some commonly used class libraries and intended for
internal use. See the docstring for jdee-import-excluded-classes for
more information.

Thanks to Len Trigg for contributing the initial implementation of the
import wizard and to Martin Schwarmberger for significantly enhancing
the import wizard.

@node Importing All Classes, Expanding Package Imports, Importing Classes, Generating Import Statements
@subsubsection Importing All Classes

The JDEE->Code Generation->Import->All (jdee-import-all, C-c C-v z)
imports all the classes that need to be imported into the current
buffer.

The command imports all classes that meet the following conditions:
@itemize
@item
The class's base name begins with an uppercase letter.

@item
The class's base name contains at least one noninitial lowercase
letter.

@item
The class is not already imported into the buffer.

@item
The class is not in jdee-import-excluded-classes.

@item
The class exists on the current classpath.
@end itemize

If more than one import candidate with the same base name exists on
the classpath, the JDEE displays a dialog that allows you to select
one of the candidates.

@indentedblock
Note: You can use the JDEE->Code Generation->Import->Import All Unique
(jdee-import-all-unique ) command to avoid the dialog box. This command
imports all classes whose unqualified names appear only once on the
classpath.
@end indentedblock

Thanks to Phillip Lord for contributing the initial implementation of
the Import All Wizard.

@node Expanding Package Imports, Collapsing Class Imports, Importing All Classes, Generating Import Statements
@subsubsection Expanding Package Imports

To expand a package import statement, select JDEE->Code
Generation->Import->Expand Package Imports
(jdee-import-expand-imports). This command replaces a package import
statement, e.g.:

@example
import java.io.*;
@end example

with import statements for the members of that package referenced by
the current buffer, e.g.:

@example
import java.io.BufferedReader;
import java.io.InputStreamReader;
import java.io.IOException;
@end example

@node Collapsing Class Imports, Grouping Imports, Expanding Package Imports, Generating Import Statements
@subsubsection Collapsing Class Imports

To collapse class import statements in the current buffer into package
imports, select JDEE->Code Generation->Import->Collapse Class Imports
(jdee-import-collapse-imports). This command collapses imports for any
package that contains as many as or more than the number of imports
specified by jdee-import-collapse-imports-threshhold. The default value
of this variable is 2. This causes this command to collapse imports
for any package from which the current buffer imports two or more
classes. For example, this command, by default, collapses:

@example
import java.io.BufferedReader;
import java.io.InputStreamReader;
import java.io.IOException;
@end example

to

@example
import java.io.*;
@end example

@node Grouping Imports, Deleting Unneeded Imports, Collapsing Class Imports, Generating Import Statements
@subsubsection Grouping Imports

To organize import statements into groups of related imports, select
JDEE->Code Generation->Import->Organize Imports
(jdee-import-organize). By default this command groups import
statements into two groups separated by a blank line. The first group
contains all imports from the java and javax packages. The other group
contains imports from all other packages. The imports are sorted
alphabetically in ascending order in each group, e.g.:

@example
import java.io.InputStreamReader;
import java.util.Hashtable;
import javax.swing.JFrame;
import javax.swing.JPanel;

import jmath.LinearSystem;
import jmath.Test;
@end example

The following variables allow you to customize the organization of
imports into groups:

@table @code
@item jdee-import-group-function
This variable allows you to specify a function that assigns imports to
groups. The default group function is jdee-import-group-of, which uses
rules specified by the following variable to assign imports to
groups.

@item jdee-import-group-rules
This variable specifies a list of rules for assigning import
statements to group, e.g., '(("^javax\\." . "Swing")), Each rule
consists of two parts: a regular expression and an optional group name
specifier. The jdee-import-group-of function assigns an import
statement to the group if it matches the regular expression. The group
name specifier is either a string that specifies the name or an index
to a component of the regular expression to be used as the group
name.

@item jdee-import-insert-group-names
Specifies whether to insert an import group's name in the buffer.

@item jdee-import-default-group-name
Specifies the default name for an import group.

@item jdee-import-blank-line-between-groups
Specifies whether to insert a blank line between import groups.

@item jdee-import-sorted-groups
Specifies whether and how to sort groups of packages. Options include
no sorting, in the order specified by grouping rules, or in ascending
or descending alphabetical order.
@end table

@node Deleting Unneeded Imports,  , Grouping Imports, Generating Import Statements
@subsubsection Deleting Unneeded Imports

To delete superfluous import statements from the current buffer,
select JDEE->Code Generation->Import->Delete Unneeded
(jdee-import-kill-extra-imports). This command deletes all import
statements for classes that are not actually referenced by the class
in the current buffer.

@node Code Wizards, Code Templates, Generating Import Statements, Generating Code
@subsection Code Wizards

The JDEE provides a set of procedural code generators called code
wizards. They include:


Method Override Wizard
A method that overrides a method inherited by the class containing point.

Interface Wizard
Implementation of an interface in the class containing point.

Delegate Wizard
Methods that delegate tasks to a specified class.

Abstract Class Wizard
Implementations of the abstract methods inherited by the class containing point.

Get/Set Wizard
Get and set methods for the private fields of the class containing point.

@indentedblock
Note: Some of the wizards use the BeanShell to run Java code. A wizard
starts the Beanshell interpreter if it is not already running. Thus,
you may experience a slight delay when invoking a wizard for the first
time in a session.
@end indentedblock

@menu
* Method Override Wizard::
* Interface Wizard::
* Delegate Wizard::
* Get/Set Wizard::
@end menu

@node Method Override Wizard, Interface Wizard, Code Wizards, Code Wizards
@subsubsection Method Override Wizard
The method override wizard generates a skeleton method that overrides
a similarly named method defined by a superclass.

To override a method of a superclass:
@enumerate
@item
Position the Emacs point at the location in the buffer where you want
the generated method to appear.

The point must be within the class that is overriding the method.

@item
Select Wizards->Override Method from the JDEE menu or enter M-x
jdee-wiz-overrided-method.

The JDEE prompts you to enter the name of the method to be overridden
in the minibuffer.

The name must be the name of a method defined by an ancestor of the
class in which the Emacs point is located. The compiled class of the
ancestor must be on the classpath specified by jdee-global-classpath.

@item
Enter the name of the method to be overridden.

If the ancestors of the class in which you are overriding the method
define more than one method of the same name, the wizard displays a
dialog buffer that lists the methods. For example, Java's awt class
hierarchy defines several variants of the method repaint. If you
specify repaint as the method to override, the JDEE displays a dialog
buffer.

The dialog buffer lists the signature of each variant of the method
you specified. Next to each signature is a radio button. The radio
button of the currently selected signature contains an asterisk. To
select another signature, right-click the radio button next to the
variant. To confirm your selection and dismiss the dialog, right-click
the [Ok] button.

@item
Select the method variant you want to override and click the [Ok]
button.

The wizard inserts a skeleton implementation of the selected method at
the current point in the Java source buffer.

The wizard also inserts import statements for any classes referenced
by the method that are not already imported by the containing class
either explicitly or implicitly. The wizard inserts the import
statements at the head of the source buffer after any existing import
statements, or any package statement, or the first blank line in the
buffer.
@end enumerate

@indentedblock
Note: The method override wizard uses the BeanShell to create the
interface implementation. If the BeanShell is not currently running,
the wizard starts the BeanShell. Thus, if the BeanShell is not already
running, you may experience a short pause the first time you override
a method.
@end indentedblock

@node Interface Wizard, Delegate Wizard, Method Override Wizard, Code Wizards
@subsubsection Interface Wizard

This wizard creates a skeleton implementation of any interface defined
on the classpath specified by jdee-global-classpath.

To create an implementation of an interface:
@enumerate
@item
If the interface is to be implemented by a new class, create the class
in a buffer.

@item
Position the Emacs point at the point in the class where you want the
implementation of the interface's methods to appear.

@item
Select JDEE->Wizards->Implement Interface or enter M-x
jdee-wiz-implement-interface.

The JDEE prompts you to enter the name of the interface to be
implemented.

@item
Enter the fully qualified name of the interface, for example,
java.awt.Event.MouseListener.

The wizard inserts skeleton implementations of the methods declared by
the interface at the current point in the current buffer. It inserts
import statements for any classes required by the interface at the
head of the current buffer (only if import statements do not already
exist for the required classes). It also updates or creates an
implements clause for the class.
@end enumerate

@indentedblock
Note: The interface wizard uses the BeanShell to create the interface
implementation. If the BeanShell is not currently running, it starts
the BeanShell. Thus, if the BeanShell is not already running, you may
experience a short pause the first time you use the wizard.
@end indentedblock

Thanks to Eric Friedman for creating the framework for the interface,
method override, and abstract class wizards and for contributing the
initial implementation of the interface wizard.

@node Delegate Wizard, Get/Set Wizard, Interface Wizard, Code Wizards
@subsubsection Delegate Wizard

This wizard generates methods that delegate calls to a class in the
current buffer to an attribute of the class, i.e., to an object that
is a field of the current class. For example, if the current buffer
contains class A and A has an attribute, A.b, that is an instance of
class B, this wizard generates all the public methods of class B in A
and delegates handling of those methods to b.

Thanks to Charles Hart for contributing this wizard.

@node Get/Set Wizard,  , Delegate Wizard, Code Wizards
@subsubsection Get/Set Wizard

This wizard generates get and set methods for the private fields of
the class at point, but only if the fields do not already have get or
set methods. To generate the methods, move point to the point in the
class where you want the get and set methods to appear. Then select
JDEE->Code Generation->Wizards->Generate Get/Set Methods... or enter
M-x jdee-wiz-get-set-methods

Thanks to Javier Lopez and Sandip Chitale for contributing this
wizard.

@node Code Templates,  , Code Wizards, Generating Code
@subsection Code Templates

@menu
* Buffer Templates::
* Specifying Boilerplate Text::
* Code Templates Customization Variables::
* Point Templates::
* Customizing Templates::
* Creating Templates::
* Defining a Template and Template Insertion Function::
* Registering Custom Templates::
* Assigning Keys to Templates::
@end menu

@node Buffer Templates, Specifying Boilerplate Text, Code Templates, Code Templates
@subsubsection Buffer Templates

These commands create buffers containing a skeleton Java class. Each
command prompts you to enter the path to a new Java source file. They
then create a buffer for the new file and insert a template for a
class of the same name as the newly created file. In particular, the
command:

@table @code
@item Files->JDE New->Class
creates a buffer containing a generic Java public class

@item Files->JDE New->Console
creates a buffer containing the main class of a Java console
application

@item Files->JDE New->Other
prompts you to create any of the above buffers or a custom
(user-defined) buffer.
@end table

You can create an empty Java class buffer by selecting Files->Open
(C-x f) and entering the path for a new file whose root name is the
same as the class you want to create and whose extension is .java.

@node Specifying Boilerplate Text, Code Templates Customization Variables, Buffer Templates, Code Templates
@unnumberedsubsubsec Specifying Boilerplate Text

You can specify boilerplate text (for example, a copyright notice) to
be inserted at the head of class source files created by the JDE. The
JDEE provides two ways to specify the boilerplate text. The simplest
way is to enter the lines of boilerplate text as the value of the
customization variable jdee-gen-buffer-boilerplate. Another way to
specify the text is to set the value of the customization variable
jdee-gen-boilerplate-functionto a function that generates the
boilerplate text. (The default value of this variable is
jdee-gen-create-buffer-boilerplate, which returns the value of the
boilerplate variable, jdee-gen-buffer-boilerplate). The functional
approach allows you to generate boilerplate text dynamically by
evaluating the appropriate Lisp code. By saving the values of
boilerplate variables in project files, you can specify different
boilerplate text for each project.

@node Code Templates Customization Variables, Point Templates, Specifying Boilerplate Text, Code Templates
@unnumberedsubsubsec Customization Variables Code Templates

The following JDEE customization variables control creation of
autocoded Java source buffers:

@multitable @columnfractions .45 .15 .40
@headitem Variable @tab Group @tab Usage
@item jdee-gen-class-buffer-template @tab Autocode @tab Template for a generic public class buffer.
@item jdee-gen-console-buffer-template @tab Autocode @tab Template for a console application buffer.
@item jdee-gen-jfc-app-buffer-template @tab Autocode @tab Template for a JFC (Swing) application.
@item jdee-gen-junit-test-class-buffer-template @tab Autocode @tab Template for a JUnit test case class. This template requires the JUnit test framework.
@item jdee-gen-buffer-templates @tab Autocode @tab Specifies templates available to create Java buffers.
@item jdee-gen-buffer-boilerplate @tab Autocode @tab Specifies lines of text to be inserted at the head of class files.
@item jdee-gen-boilerplate-function @tab Autocode @tab Specifies a function that returns a string of boilerplate text. The default value is jdee-gen-create-buffer-boilerplate, which returns the value of jdee-gen-buffer-boilerplate.
@end multitable

See Customizing Templates for information on how to customize the
class creation templates.

@node Point Templates, Customizing Templates, Code Templates Customization Variables, Code Templates
@subsubsection Point Templates

The following commands insert templates at the current point in the
buffer:

@table @asis
@item JDEE->Generate->Get/Set Pair
generates an instance variable and a get and set method for that
variable

@item JDEE->Generate->Println
generates a @code{System.out.println(...);} statement.

@item JDEE->Generate->Action
generates and registers an action listener for a specified component.

@item JDEE->Generate->Listener->Window
generates and registers a window listener for a specified window.

@item JDEE->Generate->Listener->Mouse
generates and registers a mouse listener for a specified component.

@item JDEE->Generate->Other
allows you to select any of the above templates or a custom
(user-defined) template.
@end table

The following variables control generation of code at point:

@multitable @columnfractions .45 .15 .40
@headitem Variable @tab Group @tab Usage
@item jdee-gen-get-set-var-template @tab Autocode @tab Defines a get/set method pair template.
@item jdee-gen-listener-action-template @tab Autocode @tab Defines an action listener template.
@item jdee-gen-listener-window-template @tab Autocode @tab Defines a window listener template.
@item jdee-gen-listener-mouse-template @tab Autocode @tab Defines a mouse listener template.
@item jdee-gen-inner-class-template @tab Autocode @tab Defines a template for creating a class inside another class or inside an existing source buffer.
@item jdee-gen-code-templates @tab Autocode @tab Specifies available code templates.
@end multitable

See @ref{Customizing Templates} for information on how to customize
templates provided by the JDEE.

@ref{Creating Templates} for information on how to create templates
from scratch.

@node Customizing Templates, Creating Templates, Point Templates, Code Templates
@subsubsection Customizing Templates

You can customize the JDEE's standard code templates, using the Emacs
customization feature.

To customize an autocode template:
@enumerate
@item
Select JDEE->Options->Autocode

The JDEE displays a customization buffer containing the autocode
templates.

@item
Edit the template to suit your needs.

The JDEE uses the template format defined by tempo.el to represent
class templates. Each template consists of a list of strings, symbols,
and functions, each of which represents content to be inserted
successively into the buffer at the current point. The strings
represent fixed content. The symbols and functions represent variable
content. See the docstring for the function tempo-define-template for
more information, including the meaning of special symbols such as
@code{'n}.

@item
Select the state button associated with the template.

A menu pops up with a list of options for saving your changes.

@item
Save your changes.
@end enumerate

Select Save for Future Sessions if you want your changes to apply to
all projects. If you want your changes to apply only to the current
projects, select Set for Current Session. Then select
JDEE->Options->Save Project to save your changes in the current
project's project file.

@node Creating Templates, Defining a Template and Template Insertion Function, Customizing Templates, Code Templates
@subsubsection Creating Templates

The JDEE considers any command (interactive function) that inserts
code into a buffer at point to be a template. The JDEE uses the Emacs
tempo library to create built-in templates. You can use tempo to
create your own, add-on templates (see below and the doc for the
tempo-define-template for more information) or create templates from
scratch. In either case, once you have created a template, you can add
it to the JDE's lists of available code and/or buffer templates, using
the JDEE's jdee-gen-code-templates and/or jdee-gen-buffer-templates
variables, respectively. Adding a template to these lists enables you
to invoke the templates from the JDEE menus. When adding a template,
you need to specify a unique title for the template. These titles
enable you to specify the templates when invoking them, using the
JDE's custom code template commands (Files->JDE New->Custom and
JDEE->Generate->Custom). You can use auto completion to enter a
template title when invoking a custom code generation command. Note
that you can specify different sets of templates for different
projects, by setting and saving the template list variables in project
files. See the following sections for more information:

@node Defining a Template and Template Insertion Function, Registering Custom Templates, Creating Templates, Code Templates
@unnumberedsubsubsec Defining a Template and Template Insertion Function

The tempo-define-template macro enables you to define a template and a
function that inserts that template at the current point in the
current buffer. You specify the template as a list oftemplate elements
where each element is text, a special symbol, or a Lisp
expression. The function inserts each text element exactly as
specified in the buffer; it replaces special symbols with some text
(e.g., user input), and it replaces Lisp expressions with the text
that results from evaluating them.

For example, the following Lisp code:

@example
(tempo-define-template "foo"
;; template name
'("System.out.println(\"foo\");")
;;template definition "f"
;; abbreviation "Inserts a print foo message")
;; template documentation
@end example

defines a template for Java code that always prints "foo" to standard
out:

@example
System.out.println("foo");
@end example

Notice that the template definition uses the Lisp string escape
character to specify the string "foo". This is necessary when you want
to include quoted strings in a template definition.

The sample Lisp form also defines an interactive template function
tempo-template-foo. Now suppose you insert the sample code in your
.emacs file. After Emacs starts up, whenever you enter the command M-x
tempo-template-foo, Emacs inserts:

@example
System.out.println("foo");
@end example

at the current point in your Java source buffer (or any buffer, tempo
doesn't care).

The preceding example is admittedly not vary useful because it always
prints the same text. You can create more useful templates, using
special tempo template symbols and lisp forms. This approach, for
example, allows you to create a template that can print any
user-defined text to standard out:

@example
(tempo-define-template "debug"
;; template name '("if (debug)" n>
;; insert new line plus indent
"System.out.println(" (p "Enter debug message:")       ;; Prompts for debug message
");") "d"
;; abbreviation "Inserts a print debug message")
;; template documentation
@end example

The template function produced by this example prompts you to enter
the text to be printed when inserting the function into a buffer. In
particular, it inserts:

@example
if (debug) System.out.println(DEBUG-MESSAGE);
@end example

where DEBUG-MESSAGE is any text that you enter. For example, suppose
you enter:

@example
"Selected color = " + color
@end example

at the prompt. The template function inserts:

@example
if (debug) System.out.println("Selected color = " + color);
@end example

at the current point in the buffer.

See the documentation for tempo-define-template (type c-h f
tempo-define-template) for more information on creating templates.

@node Registering Custom Templates, Assigning Keys to Templates, Defining a Template and Template Insertion Function, Code Templates
@unnumberedsubsubsec Registering Custom Templates

You can register templates that you create with the JDEE. When you
register a template with the JDEE, it appears among the list of
templates that you can select when you select
JDEE->Generate->Other.....

You register a template by customizing the JDEE variable
jdee-gen-code-templates. The value of this variable is a list of the
template functions that the JDEE command JDEE->Generate->Other.... can
invoke.

To register a custom template, add its name to the list.

To insert a template that you have registered:

@enumerate
@item
Select JDEE->Generate->Other....

The JDEE displays the prompt @code{Enter template:} in the
minibuffer.

@item
Enter the template's name and press Enter or press the Tab key to
display a list of templates in a completion buffer:

@item
Select the template you want by double-clicking its name.
@end enumerate

@node Assigning Keys to Templates,  , Registering Custom Templates, Code Templates
@unnumberedsubsubsec Assigning Keys to Templates

You can assign templates to keyboard keys to speed use of frequently
used templates. For example, insert this form:

@example
(global-set-key [f9] 'jdee-gen-to-string-method)
@end example

in your .emacs file to assign the @kbd{F9} function key to the JDEE
template that generates a skeleton toString method.

@node Checking Coding Style, Compiling Java Programs, Generating Code, User's Guide
@section Checking Coding Style

The JDEE->Check Style command (M-x jdee-checkstyle) command checks the
current buffer for conformity to a Java coding standard. The default
standard is that specified by Oracle. Execute jdee-checkstyle-customize
to customize the command to support your own coding standard.

The command displays a list of stylistic faults in a popup
buffer. Click the error message to display the line that violates the
standard.

@node Compiling Java Programs, Building Java Applications, Checking Coding Style, User's Guide
@section Compiling Java Programs

To compile the source file in the current buffer, select JDEE->Compile,
type @kbd{C-c-C-v-C-c}, or execute @kbd{M-x jdee-compile}. The compiler
uses the version of javac included in the currently selected JDK or on
your system command path by default. However, you can configure the
JDEE to use another compiler for the current project or all projects
(see Specifying a Compiler). The JDEE also allows you to configure the
JDEE to invoke the compiler with various compilation options.

@menu
* Compilation Buffer::
* Specifying a Compiler::
* Compilation Options::
@end menu

@node Compilation Buffer, Specifying a Compiler, Compiling Java Programs, Compiling Java Programs
@subsection Compilation Buffer

The compile command displays the output of the compiler in a separate
compilation buffer.

If a compilation buffer does not exist, the compile command creates
the buffer; otherwise, it reuses the existing compile output
buffer. The compilation buffer operates in compilation-mode, a
standard Emacs buffer mode. This mode greatly simplify locating
compilation errors in the Java source code. For example, to find the
line that cause a compilation error, simply click the error message in
the compilation buffer.

@node Specifying a Compiler, Compilation Options, Compilation Buffer, Compiling Java Programs
@subsection Specifying a Compiler

The JDEE supports the following Java compilers:

@table @asis
@item javac
This is the compiler that comes with Oracle's JDK and the JDK's
clones. Note that javac compiler is itself implemented in Java. The
javac executable that comes with the JDK simply starts a VM to run
javac. The executable passes its command-line arguments to javac's
main method.

@item javac compile server
This is a JDEE feature that uses the BeanShell to invoke the javac
compiler on a source file, thus avoiding the need to start a VM
everytime you want to compile a file. This option greatly reduces the
time required to compile individual files by eliminating the VM
startup time, which is usually much longer than the time required to
compile a file.

@item jikes
Developed by IBM, this compiler is implemented in C++ and hence avoids
the vm startup time that slows down javac.
@end table

To specify one of these compilers for the current project or all
projects:
@enumerate
@item
Type M-x customize-variable RET

Emacs prompts you to enter the name of a variable to customize.

@item
Enter jdee-compiler and press Enter.

The jdee-compiler customization buffer appears.

@item
Select the compiler that you want to use for the current project or
all projects.

You can skip the next step if you selected the compile server or if
you selected javac and you want to use the version of javac that comes
with the currently selected JDK, or you have selected the javac
executable or jikes and the executable for the selected compiler is in
your system's command path.

@item
Enter the path to the executable for the selected compiler.

@item
If you want your selection to apply only to the current project,
select Save for Current Session from the State menu. Otherwise select
Save for Future Sessions.

@item
Select Finish to dismiss the customization buffer.

@item
If you want the selection to apply to the current project, select
Project->Project File->Save from the JDEE menu.
@end enumerate

@node Compilation Options,  , Specifying a Compiler, Compiling Java Programs
@subsection Compilation Options

The JDEE allows you to specify compilation options by setting
compilation variables. You must use the Emacs customization
feature. To use the customization feature, select
JDEE->Options->Compile. (See Configuring the JDEE for more information
on using the customization feature). To save the compilation settings
in the project file (see Using Project Files) for the current source
buffer, select JDEE->Options->Update Project.

@menu
* Setting Compile Options Interactively::
* Compiler Customization Variables::
@end menu

@node Setting Compile Options Interactively, Compiler Customization Variables, Compilation Options, Compilation Options
@subsubsection Setting Compile Options Interactively

If you set the customization variable jdee-read-compile-args to a
non-nil value, the JDEE compile command prompts you to enter
compilation options in the minibuffer. It appends the options that you
enter to the options specified via customization variables. The JDEE
saves the arguments that you enter in a minibuffer history list. You
can recall previously entered options by pressing the up or down
arrows on your keyboard.

@indentedblock
Note: The JDEE uses the values of the JDEE customization variables to
set the compiler's command-line option switches. The JDEE assumes that
the compiler you are using (specified by the customization variable
jdee-compiler) has the same set of command-line switches as the version
of javac or jikes that you have selected. If the command-line switch
for a particular option supported by the compiler your are using is
not the same as that specified by javac or jikes, you must use the
variable jdee-compile-option-command-line-args to select the option.
@end indentedblock

@node Compiler Customization Variables,  , Setting Compile Options Interactively, Compilation Options
@subsubsection Compiler Customization Variables

The following table lists the JDEE compilation variables and the
functions used to set them.

@multitable @columnfractions .50 .10 .40
@headitem Name @tab Group @tab Usage
@item jdee-compiler @tab Project @tab Specifies the compiler (javac server, by default) to use to compile the code in the current source buffer.
@item jdee-compile-option-command-line-args @tab Compile @tab Specifies a string of command-line arguments to be passed to the compiler.
@item jdee-global-classpath @tab Project @tab Specify class paths for compile, run, and debug commands.
@item jdee-read-compile-args @tab Project @tab Specify whether to read compile options from the minibuffer.
@item jdee-compile-option-classpath @tab Compile @tab Specifies the classpath for compile command. If set, this variable overrides jdee-global-classpath.
@item jdee-compile-option-sourcepath @tab Compile @tab Specifies the path of source files for classes required to compile the current class.
@item jdee-quote-classpath @tab Project @tab Quote the classpath argument.
@item jdee-compile-option-directory @tab Compile @tab Specifies the directory into which to place the compiled class.
@item jdee-compile-option-deprecation @tab Compile @tab Warn of use or override of a deprecated member or class
@item jdee-compile-option-debug @tab Compile @tab Generate information about local variables for debug tools.
@item jdee-compile-option-optimize @tab Compile @tab Directs the compiler to try to generate faster varname.
@item jdee-compile-option-depend @tab Compile @tab Analyze dependencies.
@item jdee-compile-option-depend-switch @tab Compile @tab Command line switch that causes the compiler to analyze dependencies.
@item jdee-compile-option-vm-args @tab Compile @tab Specify command-line arguments for Java interpreter used to run the compiler.
@item jdee-compile-option-verbose-path @tab Compile @tab Print verbose messages.
@item jdee-compile-option-verbose @tab Compile @tab List directories searched to compile current class.
@item jdee-compile-option-nowarn @tab Compile @tab Turn off warnings.
@item jdee-compile-option-encoding @tab Compile @tab Specify the source file encoding name, such as EUCJIS\SJIS.
@item jdee-compile-option-target @tab Compile @tab Generate code compatible with a specified vm version.
@item jdee-compile-option-bootclasspath @tab Compile @tab Specify classpath of standard libraries for target vm.
@item jdee-compile-option-bootclasspath @tab Compile @tab Specify path of directories containing extensions for target vm.
@end multitable

@node Building Java Applications, Running Java Applications, Compiling Java Programs, User's Guide
@section Building Java Applications

The JDEE->Build command builds an application. By default this command
invokes the Unix-style make utility to build the application. You can
configure the build command to invoke the Ant build system or a custom
build function.

@menu
* Selecting a Build Method::
* Building with Make::
* Building with Ant::
@end menu

@node Selecting a Build Method, Building with Make, Building Java Applications, Building Java Applications
@subsection Selecting a Build Method

To select a build method:
@enumerate
@item
Type M-x customize-variable RET jdee-build-function RET

The jdee-build-function customization buffer appears.

@item
Select the build function that you want to use.

@item
If you want your selection to apply only to the current project,
select Save for Current Session from the State menu. Otherwise select
Save for Future Sessions.

@item
Select Finish to dismiss the customization buffer.

@item
If you want the selection to apply to the current project, select
Project->Project File->Save from the JDEE menu.
@end enumerate

@node Building with Make, Building with Ant, Selecting a Build Method, Building Java Applications
@subsection Building with Make

The jdee-make command uses a make utility, such as GNU make, to rebuild
a project. You must supply the makefiles used to build your
projects. See Sample Makefile for an example of a makefile for
building a Java project. David Ponce's JMaker package generates
makefiles automatically for JDEE projects. It uses JDEE variables to
determine classpaths, compiler options, and other information needed
to create projects. JMaker recursively creates makefiles for all the
Java packages in a project plus a toplevel makefile that invokes the
other makefiles to build the entire project.

@menu
* Make Options::
* Sample Makefile::
@end menu

@node Make Options, Sample Makefile, Building with Make, Building with Make
@subsubsection Make Options

The following customization variables allow you to specify various
jdee-make options in Project group:

@multitable @columnfractions .50 .10 .40
@headitem Name @tab Default @tab Usage
@item jdee-make-program @tab make @tab Specifies the pathname on your system of the make utility that the jdee-make uses to build your project.
@item jdee-make-args @tab @tab Specifies a string of command-line arguments (for example, "-f mymakefile all") to be passed to the make utility.
@item jdee-read-make-args @tab nil @tab If non-nil, this variable causes the jdee-make command to prompt you to enter command-line arguments in the minibuffer. jdee-make passes these arguments along with the arguments specified by jdee-make-args to the make utility.
@item jdee-make-working-directory @tab @tab Specifies the directory from which jdee-make runs the make utility.
@end multitable

@node Sample Makefile,  , Make Options, Building with Make
@subsubsection Sample Makefile

The following is a sample Makefile that you can use as a model for
creating makefiles to build Java projects.

@example
JDK = d:/jdk1.2/lib/classes.zip
JMATH = d:/jmath/src
CLASSPATH = $(JMATH);$(JDK)
COMPILER = javac VM = java
COPTIONS = -g -deprecation
ROPTIONS =
CLASSES = Test.class \
          JMathError.class \
          JMathException.class \
          LinearSystem.class

.SUFFIXES: .java .class
all : $(CLASSES)
  # Rebuild (if necessary) and run the JMath test suite. run: $(CLASSES)
  $(VM) -classpath "$(CLASSPATH)" jmath.Test

# Remove all class files from the project directory.
clean: rm *.class

# Implicit rule for making Java class files from Java
# source files.
.java.class: $(COMPILER) $(COPTIONS) -classpath "$(CLASSPATH)" $?
@end example

@node Building with Ant,  , Building with Make, Building Java Applications
@subsection Building with Ant

The jdee-ant-build command uses the Apache Ant build tool to build a
Java project.

The following variables allow you to control the build process.

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .20 .40
@headitem Name @tab Default @tab Usage
@item jdee-ant-invocation-method @tab script @tab Specifies how to invoke ant. Ant can be invoked in one of three ways. The first is via the ant script/program that comes with ant. The second is via java and the third is via the Ant Server.
@item jdee-ant-home @tab @tab Directory where ant is installed.
@item jdee-ant-user-jar-files @tab nil @tab Specifies jar files that hold user-defined tasks.
@item jdee-ant-program @tab ant @tab Specifies name of ant program/script.
@item jdee-ant-args @tab -emacs @tab Specifies arguments to be passed to the Ant program.
@item jdee-ant-buildfile @tab build.xml @tab Specifies the default buildfile to use.
@item jdee-ant-read-buildfile @tab off @tab Specify whether to prompt for a buildfile. If non-nil, the jdee-ant-build command prompts you for an ant buildfile. Note that jdee-ant-read-buildfile and jdee-ant-enable-find are incompatible and that jdee-ant-read-buildfile will override the former.
@item jdee-ant-read-target @tab off @tab Specify whether to prompt for a build target. If non-nil, the jdee-ant-build command prompts you for an ant target.
@item jdee-ant-interactive-buildfile @tab off @tab Default buildfile to use when prompting interactively.
@item jdee-ant-read-args @tab off @tab Specify whether to prompt for additional arguments to pass to Ant. If non-nil, the jdee-ant-build command prompts you for the additional arguments.
@item jdee-ant-enable-find @tab off @tab Specify whether jdee-ant find the build.xml file based on your current directory. If non-nil, we will search up the directory hierarchy from the current directory for the build definition file. Also note that, if non-nil, this will relax the requirement for an explicit jde project file. In order for this to work jdee-ant-read-buildfile must be nil.
@item jdee-ant-complete-target @tab off @tab Specify whether to enable completion of build target names in the minibuffer. If non-nil, the jdee-ant-build command allows you to use tab completion in the minibuffer to specify the build target name. This list of valid build targets is determined by parsing the Ant build file. This option has no effect if jdee-ant-read-target is nil.
@item jdee-ant-use-global-classpath @tab off @tab Specify whether to enable use of jdee-global-classpath when running jdee-ant.
@item jdee-ant-target-regexp @tab <\s-*target\s-[^...]*?name\s-*=\s-*\"\s-*\([^\"]+\) @tab Regular expression used to match target names in Ant build files.
@item jdee-ant-build-hook @tab nil @tab List of hook functions run by jdee-ant-build (see run-hooks in the Emacs documentation for more information).
@end multitable

@node Running Java Applications, Working with Applets, Building Java Applications, User's Guide
@section Running Java Applications

The JDEE allows you to run a Java application as an Emacs
subprocess. You can run multiple applications concurrently, but only
one instance of each application at a time. The JDEE displays each
application's standard and error output in an Emacs command interface
(comint) buffer. You can interact with applications that accept
command line input via the comint buffer. When interacting with an
application, you can use any of comint-mode's extensive set of
command-line history commands to speed interaction.

To run an application, enter @kbd{M-x jdee-run} or select Java->Run App
from the Emacs menubar or type @kbd{C-c C-v C-r}.

@menu
* Specifying the Application's Main Class::
* Specifying a Startup Directory::
* Setting VM Command-Line Arguments::
* Setting Command-Line Application Arguments::
* Navigating Exception Traces::
* Run Customization Variables::
@end menu

@node Specifying the Application's Main Class, Specifying a Startup Directory, Running Java Applications, Running Java Applications
@subsection Specifying the Application's Main Class

The term main class refers to the class that contains the
application's main method. The JDEE's Run App command assumes by
default that the class in the current buffer is the application's main
class. This can be inconvenient if you have an application that has
multiple classes. You may want to be able to run the application from
any buffer containing one of the application's classes. To do this,
set the variable jdee-run-application-class to the fully qualified name
of the application's main class.

You can temporarily override the setting of jdee-run-application-class
by typing C-u - before executing the jdee-run command, for example, by
typing C-u - C-c C-r. This causes the JDEE to prompt you to enter the
fully qualified name of the application's main class (as well
application arguments if any).

@node Specifying a Startup Directory, Setting VM Command-Line Arguments, Specifying the Application's Main Class, Running Java Applications
@subsection Specifying a Startup Directory

The JDEE can start an application from any directory that you
specify. By default, the JDEE starts an application from the default
directory of the current source buffer. The default directory of the
current source buffer is the directory containing the source file
displayed in the buffer. You can specify another directory as the
startup directory by setting the JDEE customization variable
jdee-run-working-directory.

To set this variable,
@enumerate
@item
Display its customization panel.

You can do this by typing @kbd{M-x customize-variable
jdee-run-working-directory} or selecting JDEE->Options->Project to
display the project customization panel and searching this panel for
jdee-run-working-directory.

@item
Enter the working directory in the variable's edit field.

@item
Save the new setting.

To save the edited bindings, right click the [State] button and choose
Set for current session if you want the settings to apply only to the
current project or Save for future sessions if you want the settings
to apply to all projects. In either case, you should save the new
settings in you project file if your project has a project file. To
save the new settings in your project file, switch to a source buffer
and choose JDEE->Options->Save Project.

@end enumerate

@node Setting VM Command-Line Arguments, Setting Command-Line Application Arguments, Specifying a Startup Directory, Running Java Applications
@subsection Setting VM Command-Line Arguments

If you set the customization variable jdee-run-read-vm-args to a
non-nil value, the JDEE compile command prompts you to enter virtual
machine options in the minibuffer. It appends the options that you
enter to the options specified via customization variables. The JDEE
saves the arguments that you enter in a minibuffer history list. You
can recall previously entered options by pressing the up or down
arrows on your keyboard.

@node Setting Command-Line Application Arguments, Navigating Exception Traces, Setting VM Command-Line Arguments, Running Java Applications
@subsection Setting Command-Line Application Arguments

Specifying a prefix argument before the jdee-run, e.g., C-u C-c C-v C-r
causes the command to prompt you to enter arguments to be passed to
the application's main method. The command appends the options that
you enter to the arguments specified via the customization variable
jdee-run-option-application-args. The JDEE saves the arguments that you
enter in a minibuffer history list. You can recall previously entered
options by pressing the up or down arrows on your keyboard.

If you set the customization variable jdee-run-read-app-args to a
non-nil value, the JDEE run command prompts you to enter command-line
application arguments by default, i.e., you do not have to specify a
prefix argument each time you execute the command.

@node Navigating Exception Traces, Run Customization Variables, Setting Command-Line Application Arguments, Running Java Applications
@subsection Navigating Exception Traces

If an exception occurs while your program is running, the JVM outputs
an exception trace. This trace appears in the run buffer for the
application.

To view the source line corresponding to a point in the exception
stack trace, right-click the corresponding stack trace line in the run
buffer. You can move up and down the stack trace by typing the key
combinations @kbd{C-c C-v C-[} or @kbd{C-c C-v C-]}.

@node Run Customization Variables,  , Navigating Exception Traces, Running Java Applications
@subsection Run Customization Variables

The JDEE allows you to specify run-time options by setting run
variables. You can use the Emacs customization feature to set run-time
variables interactively. To use the customization feature, select
JDEE->Project->Options->Run. (See Configuring the JDEE for more
information on using the customization feature). To save the
compilation settings in the project file (see Using Project Files) for
the current source buffer, select JDEE-> Project->Project File->Save
Project.

The following table lists the JDEE run variables and the functions
used to set them.

@multitable @columnfractions .50 .10 .40
@headitem Variable @tab Group @tab Usage
@item jdee-run-mode-hook @tab Project @tab List of hook functions run by jdee-run-mode
@item jdee-run-working-directory @tab Project @tab Startup directory for running or debugging Java applications.
@item jdee-run-application-class @tab Project @tab Name of the Java class to run. The command jdee-run-set-app sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@item jdee-run-java-vm @tab Project @tab Specify Java interpreter for non-Windows platforms. The command jdee-run-set-vm sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@item jdee-run-java-vm-w @tab Project @tab Specify Java interpreter for Windows platforms. The command jdee-run-set-vm-w sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@item jdee-global-classpath @tab Project @tab Specify class paths for compile, run, and debug commands. The command jdee-set-global-classpath sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@item jdee-run-classic-mode-vm @tab Project @tab Specifies that the JDEE should run the JDK's classic version of the Java virtual machine (as opposed to the HotSpot version). This option applies only to versions of the JDK that include both a classic and a HotSpot vm.
@item jdee-run-read-vm-args @tab Project @tab Specifies whether to read vm arguments from the  minibuffer.
@item jdee-run-option-classpath @tab Run @tab Specifies the classpath for  the Java interpreter. This option overrides the jdee-global-classpath option.
@item jdee-run-option-verbose @tab Run @tab Print messages about the running process.
@item jdee-run-option-properties @tab Run @tab Specify property values.
@item jdee-run-option-heap-size @tab Run @tab Specify the initial and maximum size of the interpreter heap.
@item jdee-run-option-stack-size @tab Run @tab Specify size of the C and Java stacks.
@item jdee-run-option-garbage-collection @tab Run @tab Specify garbage collection options.
@item jdee-run-option-java-profile @tab Run @tab Enable Java profiling.
@item jdee-run-option-heap-profile @tab Run @tab Output heap profiling data.
@item jdee-run-option-verify @tab Run @tab Verify classes.
@item jdee-run-option-vm-args @tab Run @tab Specify command-line arguments to be passed to the Java vm. The command jdee-run-set-args sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@item jdee-run-option-application-args @tab Run @tab Specify command-line arguments to pass to the application. The command jdee-run-set-app-args sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@end multitable

@node Working with Applets, Debugging Applications, Running Java Applications, User's Guide
@section Working with Applets

The JDEE provides specialized commands for running and debugging
applets.

@menu
* Running Applets::
* Debugging Applets::
* Applet Customization Variables::
@end menu

@node Running Applets, Debugging Applets, Working with Applets, Working with Applets
@subsection Running Applets

To run an applet:
@enumerate
@item
Open the applet's source file in a buffer.

@item
Choose JDEE->Run Applet.

The JDEE searches for an html file in the directory containing the
applet source file and displays the first file it finds, using your
system's default browser. If the JDEE cannot find an html page in the
applet's source file directory, it signals an error by default.
@end enumerate

The JDEE->Run Applet command assumes by default that the directory
containing the applet's source also contains an html page for testing
that applet. If this is not true in your case, you have two
options. You can either specify the path of the applet file via the
JDEE customization variable jdee-run-applet-doc or you can use the
jdee-run-applet command to run your applet. If the jdee-run-applet-doc
variable is not a null string, JDEE->Run Applet displays the document
that the variable specifies instead of searching the source file
directory for a document to display. The jdee-run-applet command
prompts you to enter in the minibuffer the path of an html file to
display. If you enter nothing, the command defaults to the behavior of
JDEE->Run Applet.

The run commands chooses the viewer as follows. If
jdee-run-applet-viewer is a null string (the default) or browse-url,
the JDEE uses browse-url to launch the applet doc in your system's
default browser. Otherwise, the menu command uses comint to launch the
viewer (e.g., appletviewer) specified by jdee-run-applet-viewer.

@node Debugging Applets, Applet Customization Variables, Running Applets, Working with Applets
@subsection Debugging Applets

To debug an applet:
@enumerate
@item
Open the applet's source file in a buffer.

@item
Choose JDEE->Debug Applet.

The JDEE searches for an html file in the directory containing the
applet source file. If the JDEE cannot find an html page in the
applet's source file directory, it signals an error by
default. Otherwise, it runs appletviewer in debug mode on the first
file that it finds.

The Emacs window splits into two panes.
@end enumerate

The top pane shows the applet's source file with the debug cursor
pointing to the first line of the applet's init file. The bottom pane
displays the debugger's command line interface. You can now set
breakpoints, single-step, or continue running the applet. See
Debugging Applications for more information.

If you want to specify the document to be used to test the applet,
customize the variable jdee-run-applet-doc or execute M-x
jdee-db-applet. This command prompts you to enter the test document's
name.

@node Applet Customization Variables,  , Debugging Applets, Working with Applets
@subsection Applet Customization Variables

The JDEE allows you to specify run-time options for applets by setting
JDEE configuration variables.You must use the Emacs customization
feature to set applet run-time variables . To use the customization
feature, select JDEE->Options->Run. (See Configuring the JDEE for more
information on using the customization feature). In some cases, the
JDEE also provides functions for setting the buffer-local values of
the compilation variables. To save the compilation settings in the
project file (see Using Project Files) for the current source buffer,
select JDEE->Options->Update Project.

The following table lists the JDEE applet run-time variables and the
functions used to set them (all are in Project group):

@multitable @columnfractions .30 .70
@headitem Variable @tab Usage
@item jdee-run-applet-viewer @tab Specify name of viewer to use to display page containing the applet. The command jdee-run-set-applet-viewer sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@item jdee-run-applet-doc @tab Specify name of document containing applet to be viewed. The command jdee-run-set-applet-doc sets the buffer-local value of this variable.
@end multitable

@node Debugging Applications, Specifying Classpaths, Working with Applets, User's Guide
@section Debugging Applications

The JDEE provides two options for debugging Java applications.
@itemize

@item
An Emacs interface to jdb, the command-line debugger that comes with
the JDK. See Debugging with jdb for more information.

@item
JDEbug, a Java debugger developed specifically for use with the
    JDE. See JDEbug User's Guide for more information.
@end itemize

JDEbug provides more debugging features but requires a JDK 1.2 or
higher vm. You must use jdb to debug applications running on earlier
VMs.

@node Specifying Classpaths, Using Project Files, Debugging Applications, User's Guide
@section Specifying Classpaths

The JDEE provides customization variables that permit you to specify a
classpath for the JDE's compile, run, debug, Beanshell, and other
commands. The following table lists these variables.

@multitable @columnfractions .40 .60
@headitem Variable @tab Applies to
@item jdee-global-classpath @tab All JDEE commands that use a classpath.
@item jdee-compile-option-classpath @tab Compile command
@item jdee-run-option-classpath @tab Run App command
@item jdee-db-option-classpath @tab Debug App command
@end multitable

The jdee-global-classpath variable is so named because it specifies a
classpath that is used by all JDEE commands unless overridden by a
classpath variable specific to a particular command. For example, the
JDE's Compile command uses jdee-global-classpath unless the value of
jdee-compile-option-classpath is set. Typically you want to use the
same classpath to compile, run, and debug an application. So typically
jdee-global-classpath is the only variable you need to set.

@menu
* Setting a Classpath Variable::
* Including Class Libraries::
@end menu

@node Setting a Classpath Variable, Including Class Libraries, Specifying Classpaths, Specifying Classpaths
@subsection Setting a Classpath Variable

As with other JDEE customization variables, you must use Emacs'
customize-variable command to set the JDE's classpath variables. You
can use relative paths, cygwin paths, and paths with tilde notation
and environment variables as values of JDEE classpath variables. See
Specifying Paths for more information.

When setting a classpath variable, you must enter each path as a
separate entry in the customization buffer. Do not enter the paths as
semicolon or colon-separated lists of paths. The following examples
show the right and wrong way to specify a classpath.

Example 1. Wrong Way to Specify a Classpath

@example
jdee-global-classpath: [Hide]
[INS] [DEL] Path: c:/jdee-dev/jmath/classes;c:/jdee-dev/jmath/src
[INS]
  [State]: this option has been set and saved.
@end example

Example 2. Right Way to Specify a Classpath

@example
jdee-global-classpath: [Hide]
[INS] [DEL] Path: c:/jdee-dev/jmath/classes
[INS] [DEL] Path: c:/jdee-dev/jmath/src
[INS]
  [State]: this option has been set and saved.
@end example

@node Including Class Libraries,  , Setting a Classpath Variable, Specifying Classpaths
@subsection Including Class Libraries

If you store your class libraries as jar or zip files in separate
directory, you need specify only the path of the directory in a JDEE
classpath variable. Whenever the JDEE encounters a library directory
in a classpath variable, it expands the classpath to include all the
jar and zip files in the library directory.

For example, suppose you organize your project directory as follows:

@example
myproj classes lib
         src
@end example

where the src directory contains all of your source files, the lib
directory all of your jar and zip files, and the classes directory all
of the classes compiled from the src directory. Further, suppose you
store your project file (see Using Project Files) at the root of your
project directory. Then, you can specify jdee-global-classpath simply
as follows.

@example
jdee-global-classpath:
          [Hide] [INS] [DEL] Path: ./classes [INS] [DEL] Path: ./src
          [INS] [DEL] Path: ./lib [INS] [State]: this option has been
          set and saved.
@end example

If you do not want the JDEE to expand library directories, set the
variable jdee-expand-classpath-p off. The JDEE expands directories
whose names match the regular expressions specified by
jdee-lib-directory-names. The default values of this variable are ^lib
and ^jar. So by default, the JDEE expands names that begin with the
string lib or lib, e.g., lib, libraries, etc. However, you can
customize jdee-lib-directory-names to reflect any library naming scheme
you prefer.

@node Using Project Files, Displaying Java Documentation, Specifying Classpaths, User's Guide
@section Using Project Files

A project file is a Lisp file that the JDEE loads and evaluates
whenever you open a Java source file belonging to a specific
project. The JDEE has commands that save the current settings of JDEE
project variables in the project file for the current project. Project
files thus allow you to save and restore project-specific settings of
JDEE customization variables. For example, you can use a project file
to set the value of the jdee-global-classpath variable to a
project-specific classpath automatically whenever you load a file
belonging to that project.

@menu
* How the JDEE Finds Project Files::
* Project File Contents::
* Creating a Project File::
* Creating Portable Projects::
* Disabling Context Switching::
* Project Hook Functions::
@end menu

@node How the JDEE Finds Project Files, Project File Contents, Using Project Files, Using Project Files
@subsection How the JDEE Finds Project Files

To simplify the task of finding project files, the JDEE makes two
assumptions. First, it assumes that all Java source files relating to
a particular project live in a single directory tree. Second, it
assumes that all project files have the same file name. The name
assumed by default is prj.el. You can use the JDEE configuration
variable jdee-project-file-name to specify another name.

When you open a Java source file, the JDEE looks for project files in
the directory tree containing the source file. If the JDEE finds one
or more project files, it loads the project files in the following
manner.

The JDEE first sets all the JDEE variables to their Emacs startup
values (i.e., the default value or the value saved in your .emacs
file). It then loads all the project files in the directory tree
containing the current source buffer, starting with the topmost file.

What this means is that you can use project files to extend and/or
override the settings in your .emacs file and in other project
files. For example, your .emacs file can specify settings that are
common to all your projects. You can put settings common to a group of
projects at the top of the directory tree containing the projects,
settings common to each project at the top of the directory containing
each projects, and so on.

@node Project File Contents, Creating a Project File, How the JDEE Finds Project Files, Using Project Files
@subsection Project File Contents

A project file can contain any Lisp code that can be evaluated
correctly as the last step in creating a Java source buffer. For
example, a project file can contain code that sets the value of JDEE
configuration variables. In general, a project file can contain any
code that could be implemented as a jdee-mode hook function. In fact,
you can think of a project file as a project-specific jdee-mode hook
function.

@node Creating a Project File, Creating Portable Projects, Project File Contents, Using Project Files
@subsection Creating a Project File

The easiest way to create a project file is to use the
jdee-create-new-project command (JDEE->Project->Project File->Create
New). This command creates a new project file and saves the current
values of all customized JDEE configuration variables in the project
file for the selected Java buffer. (To be precise, the command inserts
Lisp code in the project file that restores the current settings of
the configuration variables; if such code already exists in the file,
it replaces it with updated code.) Thus, to create a project file that
sets JDEE configuration variables to project-specific values:

@enumerate
@item
Open any source file belonging to the project.

@item
Set the values of the JDEE configuration variables to the appropriate
values for the project to which the source file belongs.

@item
See Configuring the JDEE for information on how to set the values of
the JDEE configuration variables.

@item
Select JDEE->Project->Project File->Save Project.

@item
The JDEE prompts you to enter the path to a directory in which to
store the project file.

@item
Enter the directory where you want to store the project file or press
Enter to store the project file in the current directory.
@end enumerate

Once you have created the project file, you can insert additional
configuration code into the file if desired. Note that the
jdee-save-project command edits rather than replaces existing project
files. Thus, you can use the command to update configuration variable
settings without disturbing any other configuration code that you have
inserted manually into the project file.

@node Creating Portable Projects, Disabling Context Switching, Creating a Project File, Using Project Files
@subsection Creating Portable Projects

You can use relative paths and environment variables to construct
portable project files. For example, suppose your project directory
has the following structure:

@example
myprj
  classes
    pkg1
    pkg2
  src
    pkg1
    pkg2
  prj.el
@end example

Further suppose that your project uses beans from a shared library
specified by the environment variable BEANS. With this setup, you can
specify jdee-global-classpath as:

@example
./src
./classes
$BEANS/lib/dials.jar
@end example

and jdee-compile-option-directory as

@example
./classes
@end example

This causes the JDEE to store classes compiled from your src directory
in the classes directory. Note that you have not used any absolute
paths in creating your project file. This means you can move your
project anywhere without having to update the project file.

@node Disabling Context Switching, Project Hook Functions, Creating Portable Projects, Using Project Files
@subsection Disabling Context Switching

When you select a buffer that belongs to another project, the JDEE
loads the project file for that project and may update the class list
for the project. This causes a slight delay before you can begin using
the new buffer. The delay can be irritating if you need to switch
frequently among open projects, for example, when copying or diffing
code from different projects. Accordingly, the JDEE provides ways for
you to disable context-switching either permanently or temporarily.

To disable context-switching permanently, toggle the customizat
variable jdee-project-context-switching-enabled-p off. Be sure to use
customize to do this and save the customization in your .emacs or
prj.el file. Note that you can use the JDE's project file loading
command, JDEE->Project->Project File->Load, to switch contexts
manually.

To disable context-switching temporarily during a session, select
JDEE->Project->Auto Switch or enter M-x
jdee-toggle-project-context-switching. To reenable context-switching,
execute the same command again.

@node Project Hook Functions,  , Disabling Context Switching, Using Project Files
@subsection Project Hook Functions

The variable jdee-project-hooks lists functions that execute after the
JDEE loads a project file. By writing hook functions and adding them
to this list, you can specify actions to be taken every time the JDEE
switches from one project to another.

@node Displaying Java Documentation, Browsing Source Code, Using Project Files, User's Guide
@section Displaying Java Documentation

The JDEE provides commands for displaying the JDK API documentation
and context-sensitive help for classes.

@menu
* Browsing JDK Documentation::
* Context-Sensitive Class Help::
* Specifying a Browser::
@end menu

@node Browsing JDK Documentation, Context-Sensitive Class Help, Displaying Java Documentation, Displaying Java Documentation
@subsection Browsing JDK Documentation

The jdee-browse-jdk-doc command (JDEE->Help->JDK, C-c  C-v C-n) opens
the JDK documentation in a browser. By default, this command displays
the JDK documentation page at JavaSoft's web site. To display a
different copy, set the variable jdee-jdk-doc-url to the url of the
index page of the copy you want to be displayed.

@node Context-Sensitive Class Help, Specifying a Browser, Browsing JDK Documentation, Displaying Java Documentation
@subsection Context-Sensitive Class Help

The JDK provides context-sensitive help for Java classes. To use this
facility, you must first customize the variable jdee-help-docsets to
specify the location of class documentation on your system. The JDEE
class help facility supports javadoc documentation by default but it
works with other types of documentation as well.

Once you have specified the location of class documentation on your
system, you can get help for the class at point in the current buffer
by selecting JDEE->Help->Symbol at Point.

@node Specifying a Browser,  , Context-Sensitive Class Help, Displaying Java Documentation
@subsection Specifying a Browser

The JDEE uses the browsers or browsers specified by the customization
variable browse-url-browser-function. See the documentation for this
variable for more information.

@menu
* Using emacs-w3m to Browse Java Doc::
@end menu

@node Using emacs-w3m to Browse Java Doc,  , Specifying a Browser, Specifying a Browser
@subsubsection Using emacs-w3m to Browse Java Doc

The emacs-w3m package uses the w3m text-mode HTML browser to enable
Emacs to render text HTML pages. This allows you to use Emacs not only
to develop Java code but also to browse Java API and tools
documentation. For information on downloading and installing emacs-w3m
and w3m, see the emacs-w3m web site.

While you're at it, you should also install the WThreeM package. This
package provides incremental searching on URLs in w3m HTML buffers, a
nice feature for browsing Javadoc class documentation, with its wealth
of links.

One you have installed emacs-w3m/w3m, you can configure Emacs (and
hence the JDEE) to use it to display Javadoc pages by customizing
jdee-help-browser-function to specify w3m-browse-url.

The w3m-browse-url function displays its output by default in the
current window, replacing the Java file in the buffer. To cause the
function to display its output in a popup window, customize
w3m-pop-up-frames.

@node Browsing Source Code, Searching Source Code, Displaying Java Documentation, User's Guide
@section Browsing Source Code

@menu
* Classes Index Menu::
* Using the Speedbar::
* Tags::
@end menu

@node Classes Index Menu, Using the Speedbar, Browsing Source Code, Browsing Source Code
@subsection Classes Index Menu

The Classes index menu appears by default in the Emacs menubar
whenever a Java source buffer is active. The menu consists of a
cascading list of all classes, methods, fields, and imports defined in
the current buffer plus the package to which the current buffer
belongs. Selecting any item scrolls the buffer to the statement that
defines the item.

The top-level menu contains an entry for each each class defined by
the active buffer followed by entries for the imports and package of
the current buffer. Selecting the entry for a class displays a submenu
listing the inner classes, methods, and fields defined by the
class. Selecting the entry for an inner class displays another submenu
for that class, and so on. Selecting the imports entry on the
top-level menu displays a submenu listing all the classes and packages
imported by the active buffer.

@menu
* Special Index Entries::
* Alphabetizing the Classes Menu::
* Suppressing Method Signatures and Field Types::
* Disabling the Classes Menu::
* Using the Keyboard to Navigate the Classes Menu::
@end menu

@node Special Index Entries, Alphabetizing the Classes Menu, Classes Index Menu, Classes Index Menu
@subsubsection Special Index Entries

The index menu includes the following special index entries:

@itemize
@item
*Rescan*

Selecting this item causes the JDEE to rebuild the index menu. You
should rebuild the menu whenever you edit the buffer.

@item
*class def*

Selecting this item takes you to the start of the definition of the
class on whose submenu it appears. Turn the variable
jdee-imenu-include-classdef off to suppress inclusion of these items in
the menu.
@end itemize

@node Alphabetizing the Classes Menu, Suppressing Method Signatures and Field Types, Special Index Entries, Classes Index Menu
@subsubsection Alphabetizing the Classes Menu

By default the Classes menu lists methods and fields in the order in
which the active buffer defines them. Use the variable jdee-imenu-sort
to customize the menu to list methods and fields alphabetically in
either ascending or descending order.

@node Suppressing Method Signatures and Field Types, Disabling the Classes Menu, Alphabetizing the Classes Menu, Classes Index Menu
@subsubsection Suppressing Method Signatures and Field Types

By default the Classes menu displays the signatures of methods and the
types of fields displayed in the active buffer. The method signatures
enable you to distinguish overloaded method names. The menu can also
display the names of methods and fields without signatures and
types. Use the variable jdee-imenu-include-signature to turn signature
and type display off or on.

@node Disabling the Classes Menu, Using the Keyboard to Navigate the Classes Menu, Suppressing Method Signatures and Field Types, Classes Index Menu
@subsubsection Disabling the Classes Menu

Set the variable jdee-imenu-enable off to disable the Classes
menu. When disabled, the menu does not appear in the Emacs menubar.

@node Using the Keyboard to Navigate the Classes Menu,  , Disabling the Classes Menu, Classes Index Menu
@subsubsection Using the Keyboard to Navigate the Classes Menu

Execute M-x imenu to use the keyboard to navigate the Classes
menu. Emacs displays the top-level items on the Classes menu in a
buffer and prompts you to enter the name of an an item in the
minibuffer. Enter the name of the item to select it. Note that you can
use completion to avoid having to type the whole name. If you select a
submenu, Emacs displays the contents of the submenu and prompts you to
enter a selection in the keyboard. If you select an index entry, Emacs
scrolls the buffer to the indexed point in the buffer.

@node Using the Speedbar, Tags, Classes Index Menu, Browsing Source Code
@subsection Using the Speedbar

To display the speedbar, select JDEE-> Speedbar. The speedbar opens in
a separate frame.

The speedbar displays a list of the files and subdirectories in the
directory containing the file displayed in the current buffer. The
speedbar highlights the file displayed in the current buffer.

Click on the expand (+) button in front of any file. The node for the
file expands to show up to three entries, depending on the contents of
the source file.

@menu
* Package::
* Types::
* Dependencies::
* Updating the Speedbar::
@end menu

@node Package, Types, Using the Speedbar, Using the Speedbar
@subsubsection Package

This item expands to show the package to which the file belongs.

Clicking on the package scrolls the buffer to the corresponding
package declaration.

@node Types, Dependencies, Package, Using the Speedbar
@subsubsection Types

This item expands to show the classes in the selected file.

Each class expands to show the constructors, methods, fields, and
inner classes defined by the class and the class's parent, if
any. Inner classes also expand and their inner classes, and so on. The
constructors and methods expand to show arguments and argument types
and return types. Fields expand to show their type.

Clicking on any class, inner class, method, constructor, or field
scrolls the buffer to show that item.

@node Dependencies, Updating the Speedbar, Types, Using the Speedbar
@subsubsection Dependencies
This item expands to show the classes and packages imported by the
current source file.

Click on class or package to scroll the buffer to the corresponding
import statement.

@node Updating the Speedbar,  , Dependencies, Using the Speedbar
@subsubsection Updating the Speedbar

If you make changes to a source buffer, you must update the speedbar
view to reflect the changes. To update the speedbar view of a buffer:

@enumerate
@item
Collapse the speedbar view of the buffer.

@item
This is necessary only if the speedbar view is expanded. To collapse
the speedbar view, click the collapse button (-) next to the buffer's
file name in the speedbar view.

@item
Hold the shift key down while clicking the expand button (+) next to
the buffer's name in the speedbar view.
@end enumerate

@node Tags,  , Using the Speedbar, Browsing Source Code
@subsection Tags

To use the etags facility, you must first construct a TAGS file that
indexes every symbol in your source code. The JDEE package contains two
shell scripts that you can use to tag your source code, one for csh
shells and the other for bash. The bash version is called jtags; the
csh version, jtags.csh.

@menu
* Tagging Java Source Code::
* Finding the Definition of a Symbol::
@end menu

@node Tagging Java Source Code, Finding the Definition of a Symbol, Tags, Tags
@subsubsection Tagging Java Source Code

To tag your source code, first copy the appropriate shell script to a
directory in your Emacs path. Then start a shell (M-x  shell). Change
to the top-level directory containing your source code and then enter
jtags. The jtags script tags every .java file in the current directory
and in all descendants of the current directory, storing the result in
a file called TAGS in the top-level directory.

@node Finding the Definition of a Symbol,  , Tagging Java Source Code, Tags
@subsubsection Finding the Definition of a Symbol

To find the definition of a symbol, put your cursor anywhere in the
symbol and enter M-.. Emacs responds by locating and opening (if
necessary) the file containing the definition and positioning the
point at the definition. (The first time you type M-., Emacs prompts
you to load the TAGS file.)

@node Searching Source Code, Customizing the JDEE, Browsing Source Code, User's Guide
@section Searching Source Code

The JDEE provides commands that enable you to find:

@itemize
@item
All occurences of strings matching a regular expression anywhere in
your project's source path (see Finding Expressions)

@item
Source code that defines the method, field, or other symbol at point
(see Finding Symbol Definitions)

@item
Source code for the class at point (see Finding Classes)

@item
Source for the parent of the class at point

@item
Source for an interface implemented by the class at point

@item
All methods that invoke a specifed method (see Cross-Referencing
Classes)
@end itemize

@menu
* Finding Expressions::
* Finding Symbol Definitions::
* Finding Classes::
* Cross-Referencing Classes::
@end menu

@node Finding Expressions, Finding Symbol Definitions, Searching Source Code, Searching Source Code
@subsection Finding Expressions

The JDEE provides two commands for finding occurrences of strings in
Java source and other types of text files:

@itemize
@item
JDEE->Find->Expression (jdee-find)

This command uses the minibuffer to prompt you for the search
expression and the paths to be searched. You can use customization
variables to specify values for the search paths and other search
options. The default values for the customization variables search the
Java source files on the classpaths and sourcepaths for your
project. See Using the Minibuffer-Based Find Command for more
information.

@item
JDEE->Find->Expression... (jdee-find-dlg)

This command uses a text dialog buffer to prompt you for search
arguments. The dialog buffer allows you to specify all search options
interactively. It is thus useful for performing searches that have
special requirements. See Using the Dialog-Based Find Command for more
information.
@end itemize

Both commands use the Unix grep and find utilities to perform the
searches that you specify. Before executing a search, both commands
search your system for copies of grep and find and signal an error if
the utilities are missing. All Unix systems include copies of grep and
find. Versions of these utilities are available for Microsoft Windows,
e.g., as part of the Cygwin Unix emulation package for Microsoft
Windows. If you want to use the JDEE's find commands on Windows, you
must install copies of grep and find on your system and either include
them in your system's command path or use the variables grep-command
and find-program to specify their respective locations on your
system.

@indentedblock
Note: Microsoft Windows provide a find utility that is incompatible
with the Unix find utility. To ensure that the JDEE finds the right
version, you should either put the Unix-style find command ahead of
the Windows find command in your system command path or use the
find-program variable to specify the Unix-style command's location.
@end indentedblock

@menu
* Using the Minibuffer-Based Find (jdee-find) Command::
* Customizing the Minibuffer-Based Find Command::
* Using the Dialog-Based Find (jdee-find-dlg) Command::
@end menu

@node Using the Minibuffer-Based Find (jdee-find) Command, Customizing the Minibuffer-Based Find Command, Finding Expressions, Finding Expressions
@subsubsection Using the Minibuffer-Based Find (jdee-find) Command

To find an expression with the minibuffer-based find command:

@enumerate
@item
Select Find->Expression (C-c-C-v-C-f) from the JDEE menu or execute
the jdee-find command.

The JDEE prompts you to enter a regular expression.

@item
Enter a regular expression that matches the expressions you want to
find and press Enter.

The JDEE prompts you to enter a list of directories to search.

The prompt may list a default search path. The JDEE determines the
default path by testing each of the following variables in the order
listed.
@itemize
@item jdee-sourcepath
@item jdee-compile-option-sourcepath
@item jdee-compile-option-classpath
@item jdee-global-classpath
@end itemize

The JDEE uses the directories specified by the first path variable
that has a nonnil value as the default search path.

@item
Edit the default search path, if desired, in the minibuffer and press
Enter.

The JDEE executes the find command that you have specified and
displays the command's output in a popup grep-mode buffer.
@end enumerate

The search results buffer lists each instance of a string that matches
the specified regular expression in the specified search path. For
each match, the listing shows the file and line number of the match,
highlighted in red, and a snippet of the text in which the match
occurred.

To visit the file containing the match, click the match message in the
grep buffer with the middle mouse button or move point to the message
and press Enter.

@node Customizing the Minibuffer-Based Find Command, Using the Dialog-Based Find (jdee-find-dlg) Command, Using the Minibuffer-Based Find (jdee-find) Command, Finding Expressions
@subsubsection Customizing the Minibuffer-Based Find Command

The following variables allow you to customize the minibuffer-based
search command:

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .12 .53
@headitem Variable @tab Default @tab Description
@item jdee-find-case-sensitive @tab nil @tab Specifies whether the jdee-find command performs a case-sensitive search. If non-nil, the search is case-sensitive; otherwise the search ignores case.
@item jdee-find-granularity @tab Character @tab Specifies the granularity of the expression search conducted by jdee-find: Character (expression starting on any character), Word (match words only), Line (match lines only).
@item jdee-find-file-regexp @tab *.java @tab Specifies the regular expression that the jdee-find command uses to select files to be searched. You can use any regular expression supported by the -name option of the GNU find command.
@end multitable

@node Using the Dialog-Based Find (jdee-find-dlg) Command,  , Customizing the Minibuffer-Based Find Command, Finding Expressions
@subsubsection Using the Dialog-Based Find (jdee-find-dlg) Command

To find an expression with the dialog-based find command:

@enumerate
@item
Select Find->Expression... from the JDEE menu or execute the jdee-find
command.

The Find Expression Options buffer appears.

@item
Edit the buffer to reflect the search options that you desire.

Note: The options you select will appear the next time you execute the
jdee-find-dlg command.

@item
Select the Ok button.
@end enumerate

The jdee-find-dlg invokes the find and grep commands with the options
you specified and displays the results in a buffer.

@node Finding Symbol Definitions, Finding Classes, Finding Expressions, Searching Source Code
@subsection Finding Symbol Definitions

To find the source code that defines the class, interface, method, or
field at point, select Find->Symbol Definition (C-c  C-v  C-y) from
the JDEE menu or execute M-x jdee-open-class-at-point. The JDEE
displays a buffer containing the source code that defines the symbol
at point in the original buffer.

@indentedblock
Note: This command requires that the symbol definition be located on
jdee-sourcepath and that the class referenced at point be located on
jdee-global-classpath. The command uses the beanshell to determine the
fully qualified name of the class referenced at point. If the
beanshell is not running, it launches the beanshell.
@end indentedblock

@node Finding Classes, Cross-Referencing Classes, Finding Symbol Definitions, Searching Source Code
@subsection Finding Classes

The jdee-open-class-source command finds and opens the Java source file
for the class whose qualified or unqualified name appears at point.

@indentedblock
Note: The JDEE uses Java reflection to determine the fully qualified
name of the class at point. Therefore, the class must be on
jdee-global-classpath.
@end indentedblock

If more than one class with the same name exists on
jdee-global-classpath, this command prompts you to select one of the
classes. The following conditions must be true for this command to
work. First, a class file for this class must exist on the classpath
specified by jdee-global-classpath. Secondly, the source for the class
must exist on one of the paths specified by jdee-sourcepath. This
command uses the Beanshell to determine the fully qualified name of
the class to be found. It starts the Beanshell if necessary. Thus, the
command may respond somewhat slowly the first time you it in a
session.

@node Cross-Referencing Classes,  , Finding Classes, Searching Source Code
@subsection Cross-Referencing Classes

JDEE includes a facility for creating and utilizing a
cross-referencing database to enable you to quickly locate all the
callers of any particular function. This functionality is very useful
for quickly figuring how unfamiliar code works, and useful for doing
certain tasks such as renaming functions. Be advised that this only
finds direct callers, and cannot detect calls via Java's reflection
mechanism. The cross-reference database must be kept in sync with the
project code, however the database generation is generally quick. The
remainder of this section explains how to configure and use the
cross-referencer.

Thanks to Andrew Hyatt for developing the JDEE's cross-referencing
facility.

@menu
* Configuring the Cross-Referencer::
* Building the Cross-Reference Database::
* Using the Cross-Reference Database::
* Updating the Cross-Reference Database::
@end menu

@node Configuring the Cross-Referencer, Building the Cross-Reference Database, Cross-Referencing Classes, Cross-Referencing Classes
@subsubsection Configuring the Cross-Referencer

JDEE's cross-referencing database is built by examining class files
for a particular project. To this end, JDEE needs to know where the
built class files for a project live. This is usually a subset of the
classpath.

Then select JDEE->Options->Project->General, and go to the "Jde Built
Class Path" option. Insert one path for each place where built classes
wind up. You can add both directories and zip files (jar/bar/etc). Any
file entered will be assumed to be a zip file.

Now that you have the built class path defined, you can configure the
cross-referencer that uses it. Type M-x jdee-xref-customize. The
following are a list the variables that can be set, and what they do:

@table @code
@item jdee-xref-db-base-directory
The cross-referencer creates a database to store the cross-reference
information. This variable defines a directory where that information
resides. It might, for example, be at the base of your project tree,
in a directory called xrefdb.

@item jdee-xref-store-prefixes
To reduce database size, it's useful to ignore all information that
doesn't refer to code you care about. For example, most people don't
need to know who calls java.lang.System.out.println. To not store this
information, insert a package prefix for each package you are
interested in. Typically, this may be just one string, for example
"com.mycompany", to store only code that references com.mycompany
classes.

@item jdee-xref-cache-size
The caller database can be quite large. However, it is useful for
efficiency reasons to keep part of it in memory. This variable
deterines how many packages to keep in memory simulatenously. The
higher this is, the faster things will be, but also the more memory
will be taken up by the cross-reference information.
@end table

@node Building the Cross-Reference Database, Using the Cross-Reference Database, Configuring the Cross-Referencer, Cross-Referencing Classes
@subsubsection Building the Cross-Reference Database

The next step into getting the cross-reference functionality working
is to build the cross-reference database. The project must be fully
built for this to work, since it takes cross-reference information
directly from the built classes.

To build the database, type @kbd{M-x jdee-xref-make-xref-db}.

If all the settings are properly configured, JDEE will go off and
create the cross-reference database. This can take from a few seconds
to several minutes depending on the size of your project. Large class
files may take long to parse, so if it seems to be "stuck", please
give it time.

When it is done, it will save the database in the base directory
specified in the jdee-xref customization group.

@node Using the Cross-Reference Database, Updating the Cross-Reference Database, Building the Cross-Reference Database, Cross-Referencing Classes
@subsubsection Using the Cross-Reference Database

There are several basic operations that use the cross-reference
database:

@table @asis

@item M-x jdee-xref-first-caller (C-c C-v a)
If your cursor is in the body of a function, then this will go to the
first in a sequence of callers to this function. If there are no
callers, there will be a message saying so.

@item M-x jdee-xref-next-caller (C-c C-v n)
After calling jdee-xref-first-caller, you can go to each of the callers
in sequence with this function. The first caller function creates a
list of callers and goes to the first one. This navigates to the next
caller on the list. You can keep calling this until there are no more
callers, in which case there will be a message saying so.

@item M-x jdee-xref-display-call-tree
This displays an interactive tree view of the function you are in, and
it's callers. Each level down will show you who calls the parent
function. In this way you can quickly get an overview of the context
in which the current function is used in. Each item in the tree will
take you to it's definition if it is clicked on.

@item M-x jdee-xref-list-uncalled-functions
Called from a java file, this lists all the functions in the file that
have no apparent callers. It's important to remember that because of
Java reflection, there is no guarantee that the functions are truly
uncalled. It only means they are not called directly.
@end table

All of these functions have two modes, a strict and non-strict
mode. In non-strict mode, the default, more potential callers are
treated as callers, including those that call an interface that the
function implements, or who call a superclass's function you are
overriding. For example, if you are in Foo.doSomething(), and foo
implements IFoo, and a caller calls IFoo.doSomething(), then this is
treated as a caller in non-strict mode. Also, if you are in
Foo.doSomething, and Foo's superclass is Bar, and there is a
Bar.doSomething(), then Bar.doSomething() is treated as a caller in
non-strict mode. In strict mode, however, the caller must specify the
function directly for it to be considered a hit. To run these
functions with strict mode, type C-u M-x and then the
function-name. So C-u M-x jdee-xref-list-uncalled-functions will list
only functions that are uncalled directly.

@node Updating the Cross-Reference Database,  , Using the Cross-Reference Database, Cross-Referencing Classes
@subsubsection Updating the Cross-Reference Database

As the code changes, the cross-referencer must be kept up to date, or
else the jdee-xref functions will start taking you to incorrect places
in files, and the callers list itself will become incorrect. As you
change the code, you can call M-x jdee-xref-update after a recompile,
and it will go through and recompute just the part of the database you
have changed.

Another, easier way to update, for those of us who leave their emacs
running all the time, is to add a line such as this in their .emacs

@example
(run-at-time "11:00pm" 86400 'jdee-xref-make-xref-db)
@end example

@node Customizing the JDEE, Installing a Plugin, Searching Source Code, User's Guide
@section Customizing the JDEE

This section describes various ways you can customize the JDEE.

@menu
* JDEE Customization Variables::
* Customizing jdee-mode::
@end menu

@node JDEE Customization Variables, Customizing jdee-mode, Customizing the JDEE, Customizing the JDEE
@subsection JDEE Customization Variables

JDEE customization variables allow you to specify compile, run, debug,
and other JDEE options.

@indentedblock
Note: The traditional way of customizing Emacs is to use setq forms to
set the values of customization variables in the Emacs initialization
(.emacs) file. This method does not work for JDEE customization
variables. To set a JDEE customization variable, you must use the
customization buffer for a variable (see the Emacs online manual for
information on the customization feature). This is because the JDEE
context switching code resets all JDEE customization variables to
their default or customized (via a custom buffer) values whenever you
open a Java source file or switch projects.
@end indentedblock

The following section explains how to use the Emacs customization
feature to set the value of a JDEE customization variable.

@menu
* Setting a Customization Variable::
* Specifying Paths::
* JDEE Customization Groups::
@end menu

@node Setting a Customization Variable, Specifying Paths, JDEE Customization Variables, JDEE Customization Variables
@subsubsection Setting a Customization Variable

To set a JDEE customization variable:

@enumerate
@item
Determine the name of the variable you want to customize.

Refer to the section of this guide that documents the feature you want
to customize for the name of the corresponding variable. Or type C-h
v followed by the JDEE group prefix (jdee-) or subgroup prefix (e.g.,
jdee-compile-option-, see JDEE Customization Groups). Emacs displays
all variables belonging to the JDEE group or subgroup. You can then
browse this list, using Emacs search, completion, and documentation
display command, to find the applicable variable.

@item
Display a customization buffer for the variable.

If you know the name of the variable, the easiest way to display a
customization buffer for the variable is to select
Help->Customize->Specific Option... from the Emacs menubar or type M-x
jdee-customize-variable.

Note: jdee-customize-variable is a special version of the standard
Emacs customize-variable command that provides a customization buffer
menu item for saving a customization in a JDEE project file (see
below). You should use this version of the command if you intend to
save customizations in project files. You can also use it to do any
other type of customization that the standard command supports. This
allows you to use the JDEE version of the command for all your
customizations regardless of whether you intend to save them in
project files.

If you know the group to which the variable belongs (.e.g., compile
options), you can display the customization buffer for the group. This
is useful when you want to customize several related variables. See
JDEE Customization Groups for more information.

@item
Edit the value for the variable displayed in the customization buffer.

@item
Save the value for the variable in your .emacs or .prj file.

If you want the setting to apply to all projects that do not have a
project file (see Using Project Files), you should save the variable
in your .emacs file. To save the variable in your .emacs file, select
Save for Future Sessions from the State menu for the variable in the
customization buffer.

If you want the setting to apply only to the current project, select
Save in JDEE Project File from the State menu for the variable.

Note: The Save in JDEE Project File menu item appears only if you used
the jdee-customize-variable command to create the customization buffer.

If a project file does not exist for the project, the JDEE prompts you
to enter a name for the project. It then creates a project file for
the project with the name that you enter.
@end enumerate

@node Specifying Paths, JDEE Customization Groups, Setting a Customization Variable, JDEE Customization Variables
@subsubsection Specifying Paths

You can use paths containing environment variables and or a tilde (~),
cygwin paths, and relative paths as a value of any JDEE customization
variable that requires a path.

@emph{Environment Variables}

The JDEE accepts paths that contain envirnoment variables, for example,

@example
$JDK_HOME/src
@end example

The JDEE replaces the environment variables with their actual values
before passing the paths to commands (e.g., javac) that require
them. You must use Unix notation (i.e., $VARNAME or $@{VARNAME@}) to
specify an environment variable in a path even on Windows.

@emph{Tilde (~) Notation}

The JDEE accepts paths that begin with a tilde, for example,
~/myproj/classes. The JDEE replaces the tilde with the path to your
home directory.

@emph{Relative Paths}

A relative path is a path that begins with a period, for example,
./src. If jdee-resolve-relative-paths is set to a non-nil value (the
default), the JDEE converts a relative path to an absolute path by
appending the relative path to the path of the project file that set
the path variable, or if no such file exists, to the path of the
current Java source buffer.

You can use your .emacs file to specify default relative paths for
projects. For example, setting jdee-global-classpath to ./classes in
your .emacs file specifies that the default location of class files is
in a subdirectory of the project file directory named classes.

@emph{Cygwin Paths}

You can use cygwin style paths in JDEE classpath variables on
Windows. The JDEE converts such paths to DOS paths before using them,
using a conversion function that you can specify.

The jdee-cgywin-path-converter variable allows you to choose the path
conversion function used by the JDEE.

@table @asis
@item jdee-cygwin-path-converter-internal
This is the default path conversion function used by the JDE. It
converts any paths of the form //[a-z]/ or //cygdrive/[a-z]/ to the
corresponding DOS form. For example it converts /c/jde/java/classes to
c:/jde/java/classes.

@item jdee-cygwin-path-converter-cygpath
This function invokes the cygwin cygpath utility to perform the path
conversion. The advantage is that the cygwin path utility can
recognize and convert Unix style paths that represent mount points in
the cygwin mount table. For example, suppose that you have mounted
d:/javadev as /javadev in the cygwin mount table. Then choosing
jdee-cygwin-path-converter-cygpath allows you to use paths beginning
with /javadev in JDEE classpaths. The drawback is that the conversion
is slow as it requires running the cygwin utility for each Unix-style
path to be converted.

@item A custom conversion function that you supply.
@end table

@node JDEE Customization Groups,  , Specifying Paths, JDEE Customization Variables
@subsubsection JDEE Customization Groups

The JDEE defines a top-level customization group, the JDEE Group, for
JDEE customization variables. The JDEE Group itself contains the
following subgroups:

@emph{Compile Option Group}

Specifies compile options corresponding to the command-line arguments
(e.g., -d) accepted by the JDK compiler, javac. When you execute the
JDEE compile command, the JDEE uses the settings of this group to
construct a list of command-line arguments that it passes to the Java
compiler that the JDEE uses to compile Java source programs. The
compiler is itself an option that you can specify (see the Project
Option Group). You can specify command-line arguments directly by
setting the value of the jdee-compile-option-command-line-args
variable. You can display the customization buffer for the Compile
Option Group by selecting JDEE-> Project->Options->Compile from the
Emacs menubar.

@emph{Run Option Group}

Specifies run-time options corresponding to the command-line arguments
(for example, -classpath) accepted by the JDK virtual machine,
java. When you execute the JDEE Run command,  the JDEE uses the
settings of this group to construct a list of command-line arguments
that it passes to the Java interpreter used by the JDEE to run
applications. This group also contains options for specifying non-java
command-line arguments (in case you want to use a VM that accepts a
different set of arguments than java does) and for specifying
arguments to be passed to the application (as opposed to the virtual
machine interpreting the application.) You can display the
customization buffer for the Run Option Group by selecting
JDEE->Project->Options->Run from the Emacs menubar.

@emph{Debug Option Group}

Specifies run-time options corresponding to the command-line arguments
(for example, -classpath) accepted by the JDK debugger, jdb. jdb
accepts the same command-line arguments as java. However, the JDEE
maintains two parallel sets of configuration variables for these
programs in case you want to use a different set of options for
running a program in debug mode then you use for running it
normally. When you execute the JDEE Debug command, the JDEE uses the
settings of this group to construct a list of command-line arguments
that it passes to the Java debugger used by the JDEE to run
applications in debug mode. You can display the customization buffer
for the Debug Option Group by selecting JDEE->Project->Options->Debug
from the Emacs menubar.

@emph{Autocode Group}

Specifies templates used to generate code automatically.

@emph{General Options Group}

Specify all other JDEE options. You can display the customization
buffer for the General Option Group by selecting
JDEE->Project->Options->General from the Emacs menubar.

@node Customizing jdee-mode,  , JDEE Customization Variables, Customizing the JDEE
@subsection Customizing jdee-mode

The JDEE defines a major mode, named jdee-mode, for editing Java source
files. This mode derives from the standard Emacs Java source editing
mode java-mode. In particular, it inherits all the functions and
customization variables defined by java-mode and adds its own
customization variables. When you load a Java source file, Emacs runs
a JDEE mode initialization function called jdee-mode. The jdee-mode
function in turn calls the Java mode intialization function,
java-mode. The last thing that jdee-mode does before returning is to
call a JDEE mode function, if it exists. You can customize the JDEE by
defining a JDEE mode hook function in your .emacs file. The following
is an example of how to do this:

@example
(defun my-jdee-mode-hook ()
  (message "my-jdee-mode-hook function executed"))
    (add-hook 'jdee-mode-hook 'my-jdee-mode-hook)
@end example

The preceding example defines a JDEE mode hook function named
my-jdee-mode-hook and adds it to the list of JDEE mode hook functions,
using the Emacs Lisp function add-hook. Now, whenever you open a Java
source file, jdee-mode invokes the function my-jdee-mode-hook. Of
course, the hook function defined in this example is trivial. A
real-world example might do something more useful, such as setting a
custom indentation style.

@menu
* Customizing Key Bindings::
@end menu

@node Customizing Key Bindings,  , Customizing jdee-mode, Customizing jdee-mode
@subsubsection Customizing Key Bindings

A key binding establishes an equivalence between a keystroke or a
sequence of keystrokes and an interactive Lisp function. The keystroke
or keystroke combination causes Emacs to execute the function to which
the keystroke (combination) is bound. For example, the JDEE by default
binds the keystroke C-c C-v C-c to the function jdee-compile. You can
use the JDEE customization facility to change the standard JDEE
bindings or create bindings for functions that do not have default
bindings.


To customize key bindings:

@enumerate
@item
Open a buffer on the JDEE customization variable jdee-key-bindings.

You can do this by typing M-x customize-variable  jdee-key-bindings or
by selecting JDEE->Options->Project and searching the resulting JDEE
project customization buffer for jdee-key-bindings.

@item
Edit the buffer to specify altered or new bindings.

For example, to add a binding, right click the [INS] button, then
enter the key stroke in the Key field and the interactive function
(command) to which it is bound in the Command field.

@item
Save the edited bindings.

To save the edited bindings, right click the [State] button and choose
Set for current session if you want the settings to apply only to the
current project or Save for future sessionsif you want the settings to
apply to all projects. In either case, you should save the new
settings in you project file if your project has a project file. To
save the new settings in your project file, switch to a source buffer
and choose JDEE-> Options->Save Project from the Emacs menubar.
@end enumerate

@node Installing a Plugin,  , Customizing the JDEE, User's Guide
@section Installing a Plugin

To install a plugin:

@enumerate
@item
Copy the zip or jar file containing the plugin in to the JDEE's
plugins directory.

Note: By default the JDEE plugin directory is a subdirectory of the
JDEE directory named plugins. If you want to keep your plugins in
another directory, set jdee-plugins-directory to the path of that
directory.

@item
Execute M-h jdee-pi-install-plugins.

This command installs any plugins at the top level of the plugins
directory in the plugins directory.
@end enumerate

If the plugin adds any menu items to the JDEE's plugins menu (named
JDEpi), you should now be able to see the items on the plugins menu.
@c JDEE User's Guide ends here

@c JDEE Developer's Guide starts here
@node Developer's Guide, Index, User's Guide, Top
@chapter Developer's Guide

@menu
* JDEE Components::             Describes parts of JDEE
* Creating Plugins::
@end menu

@node JDEE Components, Creating Plugins, Developer's Guide, Developer's Guide
@section JDEE Components

@cindex chapter, first

The JDEE distribution includes the following files:
@itemize

@item
@file{jde.el} Defines jdee-mode, a major Emacs mode for developing Java code.

@item
@file{jdee-run.el} Runs Java applications and applets

@item
@file{jdee-db.el} Interfaces Emacs to jdb, the command-line debugger that comes with the JDK.

@item
@file{jdee-gen.el} Contains code generation templates.

@item
@file{bsh.jar} Compiled files for the BeanShell, a Java source code interpreter developed by Pat Neimeyer.

@item
@file{beanshell.el} Provides an Emacs interface to the BeanShell interpreter.

@item
@file{jdee-wiz.el} Provides "wizards" that generate skeleton implementations of interfaces and skeleton overrides of methods declared by superclasses.

@item
@file{jdee-complete.el} Automatic field and method completion package.

@item
@file{jdee-parse.el} Java parser package.

@item
@file{java.bnf} Java grammar used to generate the JDEE's lisp-based Java parser.

@item
@file{jdee-bug.el} JDEbug user interface package.

@item
@file{jdee-dbs.el} JDEbug low-level command interface package.

@item
@file{jdee-dbo.el} JDEbug output processing functions.

@item
source code, jar files, and documentation for the Java components of the JDEE.

@item
@file{jtags} is a bash shell script that tags Java source hierarchies.

@item
@file{jtags.csh} is a c shell script that tags Java source heierarchies.

@end itemize

@node Creating Plugins,  , JDEE Components, Developer's Guide
@section Creating Plugins

Plugins are independently developed applications intended for use with
the JDEE and distributed in the form of a (g)zip or jar file. The
following sections explain how to create and install plugins.

The following sections explain how to create a JDEE plugin.

@menu
* Plugin Requirements::
* Registering a Plugin::
* Running Java Code from a Plugin::
* Bootstrap File Example::
@end menu

@node Plugin Requirements, Registering a Plugin, Creating Plugins, Creating Plugins
@subsection Plugin Requirements

A JDEE plugin must meet the following requirements:

@emph{Packaging}

The plugin must be distributed as a compressed file that can be
decompressed by Java's jar program. Compressed file formats that meet
this requirement include zip, gzip, and jar.

@emph{Directory Structure}

Decompressing the plugin should create a subdirectory in the current
directory whose name is the plugin's name and that contains at least
one directory named lisp. The plugin directory can contain any number
of other directories. The other directories can have any
names. However, it would be nice if plugins standardized on the
following directory structure and names.

@example
plugin
  bsh
   doc
   scripts
  help
    info
    html
    src      (e.g., xml files used to generate info and html)
  java
    class
    doc
    lib      (e.g, jar files)
    src
  lisp
@end example

@emph{Bootstrap File}

The plugin's lisp directory must contain a Lisp file named
jdee-PLUGIN.el where PLUGIN is the same as the plugin's top-level
directory name. This file is called a bootstrap file because it is the
only file directly loaded by the JDEE. It is responsible for
registering the plugin with the JDEE and loading any other Lisp files
required by the plugin.

@node Registering a Plugin, Running Java Code from a Plugin, Plugin Requirements, Creating Plugins
@subsection Registering a Plugin

A plugin's bootstrap file must register the plugin with the JDEE when
it is loaded. The bootstrap file should do this by invoking the JDEE's
jdee-pi-register function. This function takes a single argument: an
instance of jdee-plugin class that optionally specifies the plugin's
menu and its contribution to the classpath of the instance of the
BeanShell run by the JDEE.

@node Running Java Code from a Plugin, Bootstrap File Example, Registering a Plugin, Creating Plugins
@subsection Running Java Code from a Plugin

A plugin can use the JDEE's instance of the BeanShell to invoke Java
methods and display their output in an Emacs buffer. The JDEE provides
the following functions for this purpose:

@table @code
@item jdee-jeval
Evaluate a Java statement in the JDEE's BeanShell instance and return
the resulting BeanShell output.

@item jdee-jeval-r
Evaluate a Java statement in the JDEE's BeanShell instance, use the
Emacs Lisp interpreter to evaluate the resulting BeanShell output, and
return the result. This function assumes that the Java statement emits
Emacs Lisp code, i.e., that the Java code was developed specifically
to cause Emacs to do something.

@item jdee-jeval-cm
Evaluate a Java statement in the JDEE's BeanShell instance and display
the resulting BeanShell output in an Emacs compilation buffer. This
function is intended to run Java applications, such as style checkers,
that output error messages keyed to specific lines in a source file.
@end table

See the doc strings for these functions for more information.

@node Bootstrap File Example,  , Running Java Code from a Plugin, Creating Plugins
@subsection Bootstrap File Example

The following is an example of the bootstrap file for a plugin named
@samp{pi1}.

@example
;; jdee-pi1.el
(defun jdee-pi1-cmd ()
  (interactive)
  (message "plugin 1"))

(jdee-pi-register
  (jdee-plugin
   "pi1"
   :bsh-cp (list
             (expand-file-name "lib/lib1.jar" (jdee-pi-get-plugin-dir "pi1"))
             (expand-file-name "lib/lib2.jar" (jdee-pi-get-plugin-dir "pi1")))
   :menu-spec (list (list "Pi1" ["cmd" jdee-pi1-cmd :active t]))))

(provide 'jdee-pi1)
@end example

@c JDEE Developer's Guide ends here

@node Index,  , Developer's Guide, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
